

--- Page 1 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and
disruptions
To cite this article: ITER Physics Expert Group on Disruptions, Plasma Control, and MHD and ITER
Physics Basis Editors 1999 Nucl. Fusion  39 2251 
 
View the article online  for updates and enhancements. You may also like 
Corrigendum: Detection of nosemosis in 
European honeybees ( Apis mellifera ) on 
honeybees farm at Kanchanaburi, 
Thailand (2019 IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater Sci 
Eng. 639 012048) 
Samrit Maksong, Tanawat Yemor and 
Surasuk Yanmanee -
The activities and funding of IRPA: an 
overview
Geoffrey Webb -
Meeting report -
This content was downloaded from IP address 133.63.21.1 on 02/03/2026 at 01:50

--- Page 2 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits
and disruptions
ITER Physics Expert Group on Disruptions, Plasma Control, and MHD
ITER Physics Basis Editorsy
ITER EDA, Naka Joint Work Site, Mukouyama,
Naka-machi, Naka-gun, Ibaraki-ken, Japan
Abstract. The present physics understandings of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) stability of tokamak
plasmas, the threshold conditions for onset of MHD instability, and the resulting operational limits onattainable plasma pressure (beta limit) and density (density limit), and the consequences of plasma
disruption and disruption related eects are reviewed and assessed in the context of their application
to a future DT burning reactor prototype tokamak experiment such as ITER. The principal consider-ations covered within the MHD stability and beta limit assessments are (i) magnetostatic equilibrium,
ideal MHD stability and the resulting ideal MHD beta limit; (ii) sawtooth oscillations and the
coupling of sawtooth activity to other types of MHD instability; (iii) neoclassical island resistivetearing modes and the corresponding limits on beta and energy connement; (iv) wall stabilization of
ideal MHD instabilities and resistive wall instabilities; (v) mode locking eects of non-axisymmetric
error elds; (vi) edge localized MHD instabilities (ELMs, etc.); and (vii) MHD instabilities andbeta/pressure gradient limits in plasmas with actively modied current and magnetic shear proles.
The principal considerations covered within the density limit assessments are (i) empirical density
limits; (ii) edge power balance/radiative density limits in ohmic and L-mode plasmas; and (iii) edgeparameter related density limits in H-mode plasmas. The principal considerations covered in the
disruption assessments are (i) disruption causes, frequency and MHD instability onset; (ii) disruption
thermal and current quench characteristics; (iii) vertical instabilities (VDEs), both before and afterdisruption, and plasma and in-vessel halo currents; (iv) after disruption runaway electron formation,
connement and loss; (v) fast plasma shutdown (rapid externally initiated dissipation of plasma
thermal and magnetic energies); (vi) means for disruption avoidance and disruption eect mitigation;and (vii) ‘integrated’ modelling of disruptions and fast shutdown and of the ensuing eects. In
each instance, the presentation within a given topical area progresses from a summary of present
experimental and theoretical understanding to how this understanding projects or extrapolates to anITER class reactor regime tokamak. Examples of extrapolations to the specic ITER design concept
developed during the course of the ITER EDA are given, and assessments of the degree of adequacy
of present understanding are also provided. In areas where present understanding is identied to be
less than fully adequate, areas in which continuing or new research is needed are identied.
ITER Physics Expert Group on Disruptions, Plasma
C o n t r o l ,a n dM H D :S .M i r n o v( T r o i t s k ,c h a i r ) ,J .W e s l e y(ITER JCT, co-chair), N. Fujisawa (ITER JCT), Yu. Gri-bov (ITER JCT), O. Gruber (IPP-Garching), T. Hender(UKAEA-Culham), N. Ivanov (RRC-Kurchatov), S. Jardin
(PPPL), J. Lister (EPFL), F. Perkins (ITER JCT), M. Rosen-
bluth (ITER JCT), N. Sautho (PPPL), T. Taylor (Gen-eral Atomics), S. Tokuda (JAERI), K. Yamazaki (NIFS),R. Yoshino (JAERI). Additional contributing editors :A .B o n -
deson (Chalmers Univ.), J. Conner (UKAEA-Culham),
E. Fredrickson (PPPL), D. Gates (PPPL), R. Granetz (MIT),
R. La Haye (General Atomics), J. Neuhauser (IPP-Garching),F. Porcelli (Politecnico di Turino).
yITER Physics Basis Editors: F.W. Perkins (ITER JCT),
D.E. Post (ITER JCT), N.A. Uckan (ORNL), M. Azumi(JAERI), D.J. Campbell (NET), N. Ivanov (RRC-Kurchatov),
N. Sautho (PPPL), M. Wakatani (Kyoto Univ.). Addi-
tional contributing editors : W.M. Nevins (LLNL), M. Shimada
(JAERI), J. Van Dam (Univ. Texas).Contents
1. Introduction 2253
1.1. ITER plasma performance and
operational requirements . . . . . . . . 2254
1.2. Organization of this chapter . . . . . . 2255
2. MHD stability 2257
2.1. Ideal MHD: global equilibrium and
stability limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2258
2.1.1. Initial equilibrium . . . . . . . 2258
2.1.2. Equilibrium perturbations and
ideal MHD modes . . . . . . . 2259
2.1.3. Ideal MHD: wall stabilization
eects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2260
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 c/circlecopyrt1999, IAEA, Vienna 2251

--- Page 3 ---

ITER Physics Basis
2.1.4. Ideal MHD stability limits:
theory and experiment . . . . . 2260
2.1.5. Other MHD stability
considerations . . . . . . . . . . 2264
2.1.6. Summary and application to
ITER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2266
2.2. Non-ideal MHD: sawtooth oscillations
and central MHD activity . . . . . . . 2267
2.2.1. Sawtooth oscillations . . . . . . 22672.2.2. Ideal MHD considerations . . . 2269
2.2.3. Resistive and non-ideal MHD . 2269
2.2.4. Reconnection eects and other
considerations . . . . . . . . . . 2269
2.2.5. More recent understanding
and modelling bases . . . . . . 2270
2.2.6. ITER sawtooth predictions
and control possibilities . . . . 2271
2.3. Non-ideal MHD: neoclassical island
tearing modes and beta limits . . . . . 2272
2.3.1. Neoclassical islands:
observations, theoriesand issues . . . . . . . . . . . . 2273
2.3.2. Island onset thresholds:
mechanisms and data . . . . . 2277
2.3.3. Beta limits . . . . . . . . . . . 2278
2.3.4. Predictions for ITER . . . . . . 2278
2.3.5. Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . 2280
2.4. Wall stabilization and resistive
wall modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2280
2.4.1. Theoretical considerations and
the role of rotation . . . . . . . 2281
2.4.2. Stabilization of external kink
modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2282
2.4.3. Threshold for the rotation
speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2283
2.4.4. Active (feedback) stabilization
of RWMs . . . . . . . . . . . . 2284
2.4.5. Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . 2285
2.5. Non-axisymmetric error elds and
locked modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2286
2.5.1. Physics mechanisms and types
of locked modes . . . . . . . . . 2286
2.5.2. Theory background . . . . . . . 22882.5.3. Experimental observations . . . 22892.5.4. Implications for ITER . . . . . 2292
2.5.5. Error eld correction
and other locked mode
avoidance means . . . . . . . . 2293
2.5.6. Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . 2294
2.6. ELMs and MHD in the plasma edge . 2294
2.6.1. ELMs and other edge MHD
instabilities . . . . . . . . . . . 22952.6.2. ELM phenomenology and
categories . . . . . . . . . . . . 2296
2.6.3. Theories of ELMs . . . . . . . 2301
2.6.4. Extrapolation of edge
MHD stability resultsand models to ITER . . . . . . 2303
2.7. MHD stability of high internal
inductance and reverse shear‘advanced performance’ plasmacongurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304
2.7.1. Eects of current prole
modication . . . . . . . . . . . 2304
2.7.2. High- l
iplasmas . . . . . . . . . 2306
2.7.3. Reversed shear plasmas . . . . 23102.7.4. Summary and extrapolation to
ITER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2314
3. Density limits 2316
3.1. Disruptive density limits and scalings . 2317
3.2. Radiation and scrape o layer physics 23183.3. H-mode density limit . . . . . . . . . . 23193.4. Means to obtain high density in ITER 2320
4. Disruption and disruption related
eects 2321
4.1. Causative factors, development
of instability, and frequencyof occurrence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2322
4.1.1. Disruptions in reactor
tokamaks and in ITER . . . . . 2323
4.1.2. The physical nature of major
disruptions . . . . . . . . . . . 2324
4.1.3. Minor disruption . . . . . . . . 23254.1.4. ELMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23254.1.5. Dynamics of major disruptions 2326
4.1.6. Disruption frequency . . . . . . 2326
4.1.7. Extrapolation to ITER . . . . 2328
4.2. Disruption characterization: thermal
and current quench . . . . . . . . . . . 2328
4.2.1. Thermal quench characteristics 23294.2.2. Current quench
characterization . . . . . . . . . 2332
4.2.3. Application to ITER and
future needs . . . . . . . . . . . 2335
4.3. Vertical instability and halo currents . 2336
4.3.1. Vertical instability: causes and
consequences . . . . . . . . . . 2336
4.3.2. Halo currents . . . . . . . . . . 23384.3.3. Vertical forces . . . . . . . . . . 23394.3.4. Halo current distribution,
toroidal asymmetries, andlateral loads . . . . . . . . . . . 2340
2252
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 4 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
4.3.5. Toroidal peaking factor . . . . 2343
4.3.6. Extrapolation to ITER and
open issues . . . . . . . . . . . 2343
4.4. Runaway electron formation, loss and
wall interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23454.4.1. Knock-on avalanche
production of runaways . . . . 2345
4.4.2. Magnetic ﬂuctuation losses . . 23474.4.3. Other runaway loss
mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . 2348
4.4.4. Wall interaction . . . . . . . . 23504.4.5. Mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . 23514.4.6. Conclusions and
recommendations forfuture research . . . . . . . . . 2353
4.5. Fast plasma power, energy and
current shutdown . . . . . . . . . . . . 23534.5.1. Requirements and means for
fast shutdown . . . . . . . . . . 2353
4.5.2. Impurity pellet injection . . . . 23544.5.3. Eects of impurity pellet
injection . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2355
4.5.4. Other fast shutdown methods . 23604.5.5. Summary and extrapolation to
ITER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2363
4.6. Disruption avoidance, softening and
amelioration of consequences . . . . . 23634.6.1. Disruption avoidance . . . . . . 2364
4.6.2. Disruption onset prediction . . 2364
4.6.3. Avoidance methods . . . . . . 23664.6.4. Softening and amelioration of
consequences . . . . . . . . . . 2367
4.7. Disruption modelling and integration
of eects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23674.7.1. Integrated disruption
modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . 2367
4.7.2. Dynamic equilibrium
modelling of disruptionsand VDEs . . . . . . . . . . . . 2369
4.7.3. Pellet injection and fast
shutdown modelling . . . . . . 2372
4.7.4. Halo current models . . . . . . 2373
4.7.5. Further model development . . 2373
Preamble
Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) stability and the
microscopic and macroscopic eects of MHD insta-bility are believed to underlie essentially all aspectsof achievable plasma performance in tokamaks, andmacroscopic global and local MHD stability consider-ations underlie the factors that set the principal oper-ational limits for tokamaks { maximum plasma cur-
rent and maximum plasma pressure (beta) and pres-
sure gradient { and the closely related operational
limits on maximum achievable or usable plasma den-sity. The beta and density limits are two of the threekey physics basis considerations { energy conne-ment is the third { that govern the basic design andplasma performance feasibility of reactor tokamaks.The combination of these three considerations deter-mines the achievable fusion power and neutron wallloading and fusion power gain ( Q=P
fus=Paux).
In contrast, disruptions, which arise from the
immediate or eventual consequences of MHD insta-
bility, set a second type of operational feasibility
constraint for reactor tokamaks: one of the opera-tional lifetime of the disruption aected components,especially those associated with plasma power andparticle exhaust, and the maintenance of the pri-mary torus vacuum. Since the occurrence of at leasta small number of disruptions in any tokamak isinevitable, accommodation of the immediate eectsof disruptions is required and it is desirable to min-imize the number of disruptions that do occur. Dis-
ruption accommodation and avoidance of unneces-
sary occurrence of disruptions, therefore, constitutea second set of design and operation requirements forreactor tokamaks.
1. Introduction
This chapter addresses the basis of macroscopic
and localized MHD stability in tokamaks, espe-cially as this basis and its consequences apply toITER and/or a similar reactor scale tokamak. Thefocus is divided between presentation of the basesfor MHD stability, and consideration of the conse-quences of instability. Presentation is organized into
three major Sections. Section 3.2 deals with the var-
ious origins of MHD instability in tokamaks andon the resulting directly associated operational lim-its on current, pressure (beta) and pressure gra-dient. This Section also addresses the MHD limitrelaxation phenomena of sawteeth and edge local-ized modes (ELMs); two instability mechanisms thatare predicted to be of major importance for ITER.Section 3.3 deals with the indirect limit on achiev-
able plasma density that MHD stability and con-
nement and impurity radiation eects lead to. Sec-tion 3.4 addresses the eects of global MHD instabil-ity: major disruptions and the ensuing related eventsof vertical instability (VDE), halo current and run-away electron current conversion that disruption pro-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2253

--- Page 5 ---

ITER Physics Basis
duces. In this Section, the principal emphasis is on
the consequential eects of disruptions and on the
means for disruption avoidance and eect ameliora-
tion in reactor tokamak operation.
Aspects of plasma control, both magnetic and
kinetic, that ultimately centre on the achievementof the plasma conditions needed for adequate MHDstability and connement performance are presentedin Chapter 8. The direct turbulence level eects of
MHD instability on plasma transport and global
energy and particle connement are addressed,respectively, in Chapters 2 and 4.
An introductory presentation of the requirements
for ITER plasma performance and operation fol-lows below. This introduction provides a contextand a set of representative parameters to supportthe more specialized discussions that follow in Sec-
tions 2{4. Additional details of how energy conne-
ment, power and particle exhaust, heating and cur-rent drive, and the availability of plasma diagnosticinformation aect achievement of reactor tokamakperformance and operational reliability will be found,respectively, in Chapters 2, 4, 6 and 7. The overallintegration in ITER of MHD related issues with theissues addressed in the Chapters cited will be foundin Chapter 9.
1.1. ITER plasma performance and
operational requirements
Table 1 summarizes the key plasma performance
and disruption eect related parameters for the pro-
jected operation of the present (circa 1997) ITER
design. These parameters are intended to be rep-resentative rather than denitive and are presentedhere to provide a context for the discussions of theMHD stability, beta limit, density limit, and disrup-tion issues that follow. Table 1 and Fig. 1 show theimportance in ITER of achieving ELMy H-mode (orequivalent) energy connement at a plasma currentof approximately 21 MA (to be achieved, in turn, at
a plasma edge safety factor q
95=3, where the nota-
tionq95denotes the safety factor evaluated at 95%
poloidal magnetic ﬂux) with normalized volume aver-age betas

N=(%)a(m)B(T)=I(MA)
in the range of 2{2.5 and densities at or slightly above
the empirical Greenwald ‘limit’ density
nGW(1020m−3)=I(MA)=a2(m):0.8 nGW1.5 nGW
PH-LbN = 2.5
00.51.01.52.02.5
Confinement Factor (H H)0.6 0.8 1.0 1.23.0
1.4Fusion Power (GW)
Confinement RangeOperational
Limits RangeSustained Ignition
I = 21 MA
1.0 nGW
Figure 1. Achievable fusion power for sustained ignition
(with equilibrium thermal He) in ITER at I=2 1 M A
(B=5:7T ,q95= 3) versus normalized connement
(HH, relative to ITERH-97P(y) scaling, see Chapter 2)),
for various plasma densities normalized to the Greenwalddensity. The corresponding operational limits imposed bytwo possible values of attainable normalized beta ( 
N)
and the power needed PH{Lto maintain H-mode (see
Chapter 2) are also shown. The overlap of the density,beta and H-mode operational limits, and the expected
range of connement ( H
H) determine the possible/likely
operational domain for sustained ignition. Some of theparameter combinations in this domain exceed the nom-inal ITER design basis power of 1.5 GW: they are shownto illustrate physics basis parameter sensitivities, inde-pendent of hardware power handling capability.
Table 1 also presents the corresponding disrup-
tion related plasma thermal and magnetic energies,which are the key parameters for the ITER in-vesseland vessel design. As Table 1 demonstrates, theseenergies are nearly independent of plasma density.While plasma thermal energy will clearly depend onbeta, and, indirectly, on fusion power, in the con-
text of operation of ITER at reactor like powers (1{
1.5 GW), the basis for disruption design is insensitiveto density and beta limit issues. However, disrup-tion frequency may be sensitive to proximity to thebeta and/or density ‘limits’: these frequency issuesare addressed in Sections 2 and 4.
Figure 1 shows the eect of beta and density lim-
its on ITER performance (attainable fusion power) in
2254
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 6 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Table 1. ITER plasma parameters for sustained ignition, with equilibrium
He fraction and with Ar seeding for 50 MW to divertor
Parameter At optimum neAt Greenwald ne
Plasma current (MA) 21 21
Fusion power (MW) 1500 1200
Volume average T(keV) 12.8 12.7
Volume average ne(1020m−3) 0.98 0.85
ne=nGW 1.15 1.0
He/Be/Ar fractions: ni=ne(%) 9/2/0.17 8/2/0.16
Ze 1.8 1.8
Volume average (%) 3.0 2.6
N=(%)a(m)B(T)=I(MA) 2.25 2.0
p 0.81 0.72
Radiated power fraction 0.39 0.39
E;trans (s)5.8 6.3
Wth(GJ) 1.1 1.0
Wmag(GJ) 1.1 1.1
Basis: ITERH-97P(y) ELMy H-mode scaling plus standard ITER perfor-
mance modelling basis rules, see Chapter 2.
a sustained ignition mode with ELMy H-mode con-
nement. Given the assumption of this energy con-nement scaling basis, the achievable fusion powerdepends parametrically on attainable density (quan-tied relative to the Greenwald density) and normal-ized connement factor H
H. There are also opera-
tional limit constraints imposed by limits on attain-able density ( n=n
GW1:5), normalized beta ( N
2:5), and the separate requirement to maintain su-
cient plasma edge power ﬂow to ensure sustainment
of H-mode (see Chapter 2). These limits determinean operation domain that is centred upon 1.5 GWfusion power and H
H=1 .A tHH= 1, the lower and
upper limits on obtainable fusion power are, respec-tively, 1.0 GW, set by the H-mode power threshold
requirement P
L{H,a n d1.8 GW, set by the design
basis beta limit assumption of N2:5.
Figure 1 also shows that for a given fusion
power, the connement and beta and densitylimit requirements are inter-related in a para-metric sense, and changes in the connementor density limit basis aect the correspondingbeta requirement, and vice versa [1]. At xedfusion power, connement and beta requirementsare inversely correlated: better/worse connementrequires increased/decreased 
N.
There may also be a plasma collisionality depen-
dence inherent in the neoclassical island MHD aspectof the ITER beta limit (see Section 2.3), and, hence,achievable beta may be sensitive to plasma densityand temperature. In addition, proximity to the H-
mode density limit (Section 3.3) is anticipated toaect achievable connement (i.e. H
H), so, again,
there are additional dependences beyond what isexplicitly shown in Fig. 1. The experimental studyof these dependences and their collective integrationin a reactor regime plasma is one of the key scienticgoals for ITER operation and a goal that must awaitoperation of an ITER class experiment (see Chap-
ter 9). It is in this context of inter-relationship and
ultimate interaction that the contents of this chap-ter are approached.
1.2. Organization of this chapter
Figure 2 presents the ﬂow of logic and interaction
for the MHD stability, operational limit and disrup-
tion physics basis issues presented in this chapter.Ideal MHD stability, whose theoretical basis has beenextensively veried in numerous plasma and fusionexperiments, sets readily calculable limits on achiev-able plasma current (essentially set by q>2) and
beta in tokamaks, and results in an ideal MHD sta-bility beta limit that is 
N=3:5. This ideal beta
limit { commonly described as the ‘Troyon limit’ {
can usually be realized in ‘short pulse’ tokamak dis-
charges and is comfortably above the requirement of
N=2:2 needed in ITER for 1.5 GW fusion power.
This aspect of MHD stability, and the resulting pre-dictions for the ideal beta limit, are discussed in Sec-tion 2.1.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2255

--- Page 7 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Ideal MHD (§3.2.1):
Density limit(s) (§3.3):
Disruption + ensuing effects (§3.4):Resistive and/or 
non-ideal MHD:
I, b or ÑP limit:NA field error
locked modes
§3.2.5Edge modes
§3.2.6Wall stab.
 and RWM
§3.2.4Neoclassical
island modes
and b limits
§3.2.3Sawteeth
§3.2.2Ideal 
b limit
§3.2.1NCS, ITB
§3.2.7
Transport + confinement
Chapters 2, 4Radiation, L-mode limit
§3.3.2
'H-mode limit'
§3.3.3Disruption
onset:
 to §3.4.1
EM +
 thermal
loadsCauses, 
frequency
and instability
growth
§3.4.1Thermal and 
current quench
§3.4.2VDE and 
halo current
§3.4.3
Runaway 
electrons
§3.4.4Fast plasma
shutdown
§3.4.5Integration +
modelling
§3.4.7
Avoidance and
amelioration
§3.4.6
Figure 2. Logic and major cause{eect connections for MHD stability, beta and density limits and
disruption physics. The notation x3.x.x indicates the Section of Chapter 3 where the corresponding
physics basis is presented.
However, as indicated in Fig. 2, there are addi-
tional physics considerations associated with resis-tive and other non-ideal MHD eects (e.g. fast par-ticle stabilization and the braking of MHD moderotation by plasma viscosity) that can act to mod-ify ideal MHD behaviour and/or reduce achievablestable beta or plasma current in certain phases ofthe tokamak plasma operation sequence. The mostimportant physics considerations include the eects
of sawtooth reconnection (Section 2.2), slowly grow-
ing neoclassical island MHD activity driven by thelack of bootstrap current within internal magneticislands (Section 2.3), and the mode rotation brakingeects of small levels of low- n,l o w -meld errors that
arise from magnet construction and installation tol-erances (Section 2.5). Of these eects, the limit on
Nset by the onset and uncontrolled growth of neo-
classical island modes, and the associated propen-sity of such modes to be triggered by high ampli-
tude sawtooth and ELM activity, raises both the
direct concern that such neoclassical modes maylimit the achievable 
Nin ‘long pulse’ reactor toka-
maks to values signicantly below the Troyon limit,and the indirect concern that uncontrolled sawtoothand ELM activity may unduly excite such modes,and hence also lead to disruption. The potentiallyimportant inter-relationship among the neoclassicalisland modes and the resulting non-ideal beta limit,
sawteeth and ELMs is indicated schematically in
Fig. 2.Also as shown in Fig. 2, there are ideal and other
MHD stability considerations { especially operationwith weak or negative central shear and/or internaltransport barriers, described in Section 2.7 { whichcan potentially lead to a mitigation of non-ideal lim-its of beta and plasma stability and which can alsoenhance plasma energy connement relative to ‘stan-dard’ H-mode connement. Here, the prospects forachievement of ideal or enhanced MHD stability in
steady state reactor tokamaks and in ITER seem,
however, to be critically determined by the need tocontrol the so-called resistive wall mode and, thus,maintain high beta in a steady state plasma. Thiskey ‘advanced performance’ issue of steady state wallstabilization is addressed in Section 2.4.
The eects of MHD instability in the plasma edge
are typically manifested as recurring ELMs, and thecharacteristics (frequency, magnitude and power ﬂowdependence) of ELMs are found to be linked to theplasma edge conditions and the resulting plasma coreconnement enhancement in a rather complex man-ner. The MHD stability aspects of ELMs and theirresulting eect on the attainable plasma edge pres-sure gradient are discussed in Section 2.6, with fur-
ther reference to Chapters 2 and 4 where the conne-
ment and power and particle control aspects of theoverall plasma edge physics basis are more exten-sively presented. In terms of their eect on MHDstability and operational limits, the two most impor-tant aspects of ELMs and edge MHD are their eects
2256
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 8 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
on the triggering of neoclassical island modes and on
the so-called H-mode density limit.
The subject of density limits in reactor tokamaks
is addressed in Section 3. Here, the Section showsthat while the well known Murakami{Hugill andGreenwald empirical density limits provide a reason-ably accurate description of the commonly achieveddensities in tokamaks, more detailed study of thecauses and manifestation of density limits showsthat there are two limits: a radiation/power balance
limit that is aected by plasma boundary power ﬂow
(Section 3.2), and a so-called H-mode or edge physicslimit in which increasing the plasma core densityresults in rst loss of H-mode connement quality(marked by a transition from large type I ELMsto smaller, higher frequency type III ELMs) and,ultimately, a reversion to L-mode and eventual onsetof radiative collapse of the plasma edge temperatureand disruption (Section 3.3). In present edge fuelled
(gas fuelled) plasmas, onset of the H-mode density
limit typically occurs at densities somewhat belowthe Greenwald density. However, recent experimentswith pellet injection fuelling, especially with pelletsinjected from the high eld side of the plasma, showthat sustained H-mode at greater than Greenwalddensities and with acceptable H-mode connement ispossible. The means for achieving such high densityoperation in ITER are focused on this approach.
Figure 2 also illustrates that encounters with
current, beta and/or density limits lead to onsetof disruption. Here, while there is great richnessin the non-linear MHD instability physics of thedisruption precursor growth and instability onset(global internal reconnection, addressed in Sec-tion 4.1) from a design basis point of view, it is theresulting characteristics of the thermal and currentquench phases of disruption (Section 4.2) and the
characteristics of the ensuing VDE (vertical dis-
placement event, Section 4.3) and runaway electroncurrent conversion phase (Section 4.4) that are themost important considerations. In these latter twoaspects of the ITER disruption physics basis, thereis evidence for an important interaction; disruptionsfollowed by VDEs in present tokamaks are oftenrunaway free, while disruptions without VDEs cangenerate high levels of runaways. Dierences in the
underlying levels of MHD ﬂuctuations seem to be
the factor that determines whether or not runawaysaccumulate. In so far as runaway eects in reactortokamaks are concerned, there is strong theoreticaljustication that a new runaway conversion mecha-nism { the so-called knock-on avalanche { may leadto potentially worrisome levels of runaway energy
deposition in a high current disruption or loss of con-
trol VDE or a pellet injection initiated fast plasma
shutdown (described in Section 4.5). The generalneed for integration of all of the various physicseects involved to arrive at a self-consistent set ofpredictions of ITER disruptions and ensuing eectsis presented in Section 4.7. The subject of disruptionavoidance and the possibilities for amelioration ofdisruption eects is addressed in Section 4.6.
How plasma control ts into the overall ITER
MHD, operational limits and disruption logic is not
explicitly presented in Fig. 2, but many aspectsof plasma control are ultimately closely tied toMHD stability. Here, it is sucient to note that theobjectives of plasma control are to keep the plasmawithin all of the various stability and operationallimits that apply, and to avoid undue plasma{wallinteraction and hence onset of disruption. Theoperational means by which these underlyingphysics requirements are implemented, and certain
specialized physics aspects that apply to design and
optimization of the plasma operation scenario, areaddressed in Chapter 8.
2. MHD stability
MHD stability and the microscopic and macro-
scopic eects of MHD instability are believed tounderlie essentially all aspects of the achievableperformance in tokamaks and related toroidalmagnetic connement concepts. Global and localMHD stability considerations enter into setting thekey operational limits for tokamaks { maximumplasma current and plasma pressure (beta) andedge pressure gradient { and the closely associated
limits on maximum plasma density. The provision of
adequate MHD stability and the ability to achievesucient current, beta, edge pressure gradient andplasma density are, therefore, necessary require-ments for the design of reactor tokamaks in general,and for ITER in particular. As will be presented inthis Section, both ideal MHD stability and non-ideal(resistive and/or kinetic) MHD stability enter intosetting the various limits that ultimately determine
the achievable performance in tokamaks and in
ITER. Ideal MHD stability and the correspondinglimits on plasma current and beta are addressedbelow in Section 2.1; non-ideal MHD and othermore specialized MHD stability considerations areaddressed in the balance of Section 2.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2257

--- Page 9 ---

ITER Physics Basis
2.1. Ideal MHD: global equilibrium
and stability limits
Ideal MHD stability { which describes the stabil-
ity of MHD modes in the limit of zero parallel electriceld { governs the most fundamental aspects of equi-librium and stability of toroidal magnetic fusion plas-mas. As a result of this fundamental importance, thetheory of ideal MHD stability [2] has been developedto a high degree of computational sophistication andhas been successfully applied to explain a wide vari-
ety of eects and operation limits observed in toka-
maks. The eects described by ideal MHD rangefrom the static equilibrium properties of current car-rying toroidal plasmas to the conditions for onset ofthe rapidly growing MHD instabilities that lead todisruption. In these regards, the corresponding staticand dynamic eects of ideal MHD are, respectively,manifested most directly in the control of the axisym-metric equilibrium of the plasma column { eected
via the poloidal eld (PF) coil system of the toka-
mak (see Chapter 8) { and in initiation of disruptionowing to encroachment of the plasma current or pres-sure or pressure gradient on the corresponding ‘oper-ational limit’ for onset of growing MHD instability.The occurrence of prompt disruption whenever theplasma edge safety factor falls below 2, or wheneverthe plasma beta exceeds the so-called ideal MHD or‘Troyon’ beta limit of (%)=3:5I(MA)=a(m)B(T)
[3], are two well known examples of eects of ideal
MHD instability in tokamaks.
From the viewpoint of plasma behaviour, ideal
MHD stability applies to situations where the plasmaconductivity is so high that any current parallel tothe magnetic eld can be driven by a vanishinglysmall electric eld. Ideal MHD theory supposes theparallel electric eld to be strictly zero. In addi-
tion, when applied to tokamaks, the theory typi-
cally examines the stability of an initially axisym-metric plasma column against small perturbations.The evolution of these perturbations is governed bya linearization of the ideal MHD equations about aspecied equilibrium, and the resulting predictions ofinstability onset can usually be correlated in exper-iment with the occurrence of either disruption orobservable modication of the before MHD onset
plasma performance. In either of these cases, the sub-
sequent instability development involves a non-linearevolution of the initial mode, and, often, changesin the mode topology and plasma equilibrium state.These non-linear and/or non-ideal aspects of MHDinstability and the eects of nite plasma resistivityon ideal MHD behaviour are discussed elsewhere in
this chapter (e.g. Sections 4.1 and 2.2). The princi-
pal focus in the presentation in this Section is on the
linear onset aspects of ideal MHD instability and theresulting plasma operation limits.
2.1.1. Initial equilibrium
Ideal MHD theory for tokamaks is typically
applied to a situation in which the initial plasmaequilibrium is axisymmetric: a gure of revolution. Itcan be then shown that the equilibrium must obey a
two dimensional non-linear partial dierential equa-
tion, called the Grad{Shafranov equation [4], for thequantity =RA
,w h e r eAis the toroidal com-
ponent of the vector potential and Ris the major
radius. In solving the Grad{Shafranov equation, twofree functions of  must be supplied to respectively
describe the plasma pressure prole and current dis-tribution. In addition, it is also necessary to prescribeboundary conditions that specify the plasma bound-
ary shape and the toroidal magnetic eld. Given
these inputs, it is then, in principle, straightforwardto calculate the corresponding plasma equilibriumand magnetic ﬂux surface geometry. For certain pres-sure and current prole parametrizations and sim-ple boundary shapes, it is possible to obtain an ana-lytic solution; more typically, numerical solutions areused.
In this latter regard, a variety of ecient numer-
ical codes have been developed to solve the Grad{Shafranov equation and compute tokamak plasmaequilibria. These ‘Grad{Shafranov solvers’ can beapplied either to generate a series of hypotheticalequilibria for subsequent theoretical examinations ofMHD stability, or to reconstruct { on the basis ofexperimental data { the internal ﬂux surface geome-
try and approximate pressure and current proles of
tokamak plasmas [5,6]. Evaluation of the ideal MHDstability of the resulting equilibrium reconstructionof such ‘experimental data’ then allows the stabilityproperties of these plasmas to be assessed and cor-related with the onset of observed MHD activity ordisruption. In conducting such comparisons of the-ory and experiment, it is often important to includeallowance for the fact that small variations in the
local prole parametrizations can sometimes make
the dierence between near marginal stability andonset of instability. Accordingly, consideration of thepossible range of proles that is consistent with theexperimental data is often needed. This same needalso applies for the use of theoretically generated
2258
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 10 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
equilibria with ad hoc proles: it is important to test
the sensitivity of conclusions about stability prop-
erties to variations in the exact form of the prole
parametrizations. A variant on this procedure is toiteratively optimize the proles such that the result-ing equilibrium is marginally stable to a speciedinstability throughout the plasma cross-section.
For either use of parametrized equilibria, there are
certain ambiguities that aect the choice of the free
functions, especially in the vicinity of the magneticaxis and near the separatrix surface. These ambigui-ties and the non-linearity and ill posed nature of thefree boundary Grad{Shafranov problem (wherein theplasma boundary is determined by an external sep-aratrix that is separated by some distance from thesurface or locations upon which the boundary con-ditions for  are specied) can sometimes result in
bifurcation of equilibrium solutions [7] and/or vari-
ation in the computed PF coil currents for essen-tially identical reconstructed ﬂux congurations. Forseparatrix dened divertor plasmas, which are thetypical basis for reactor tokamak designs, there arealso potential uncertainties related to the preciseprescription of the current density prole near/atthe separatrix, and the resulting exact descriptionof the plasma equilibrium in the vicinity of the sep-aratrix X-point. Consideration of additional experi-
mental data (e.g. j(r)o rq(r) or edge temperature,
see Chapter 7 and also Section 2.7) is sometimesneeded in the interpretation of experimental data toresolve such equilibrium reconstruction related ambi-guities or prole details. With attention to thesedetails and awareness of the potential for bifurca-tion in highly shaped plasma congurations (typi-cally more strongly shaped than in ITER and presentreactor tokamak proposals), the overall physics basis
understanding of static equilibrium prediction and
data interpretation can be regarded as being fullysatisfactory.
2.1.2. Equilibrium perturbations
and ideal MHD modes
Within the context of ideal MHD, both axisym-
metric (n=0 ,m6= 0) and non-axisymmetric
(n;m6= 0) perturbations to the initial axisymmet-
ric equilibrium are possible. Here, nandmare the
usual toroidal and poloidal mode numbers. Axisym-metric perturbations are simply neighbouring equi-libria that are connected { in the context of idealMHD { by a requirement for the conservation ofentropy and safety factor q( ). For perturbationsthat are not inherently stable, the growth rate for
axisymmetric perturbations is set by the electrical
conductivity of the environment that surrounds the
plasma. For typical ITER parameters (with a rela-tively close tting toroidally continuous shell with5Ω toroidal resistance), the growth time for the
n=0 ,m= 1 ‘vertical instability’ mode is about
0.5 s, and active control of the instability via changesin the PF coil current is required (and provided) tomaintain a vertically stable plasma. The active con-trol and stabilization of such slowly growing axisym-
metric perturbations fall in the domain of what is
usually described as plasma magnetics control or PFcontrol, and the principal design issues centre aroundmatters of PF power supply current and voltage andthe detailed design of the control algorithms (plasmashape controllers) that are used to eect active feed-back stabilization of the plasma boundary shape andcurrent magnitude [8] (see also Chapter 8).
Axisymmetry breaking perturbations, which are
not aected by PF control, can be classied accord-ing to their toroidal mode number n, with the limit-
ing casesn=1( k i n km o d e s )a n d n1 (ballooning
modes) being, generally, the most important becauseof their propensity to initiate disruption. Moderate-nideal ballooning modes (with n= 5{10) localized
near the plasma edge (called peeling modes, see fur-ther discussion below) are also believed to be respon-sible for the onset of the ELMs that are closely asso-
ciated with H-mode operation. Unlike kink and bal-
looning instabilities, ELMs are self-limiting and, typ-ically, do not initiate disruption. In fact, their regularrecurrence serves to limit edge pressure gradients (ina time average sense) to values that are consistentwith ideal MHD stability. Further brief discussion ofthe MHD aspects of ELMs follows below and addi-tional details appear in Section 2.3.
Key mathematical features of all of these ideal
MHD modes are that topology is preserved and thatinnite current densities can arise in nite times. Inother words, a growing perturbation will maintainthe nested toroidal surfaces topology of the origi-nal equilibrium, but often an innite current sheetcan form, leading to non-ideal reconnection and sub-sequent topology changes. Accordingly, the ultimatedevelopment of ideal instability becomes a non-linear
and non-ideal process, and mode topology is not
always maintained once the non-linear phase begins.But the onset condition, that is, the plasma conditionin which the most unstable mode has a nite growthrate, is usually the relevant criterion for dening thepressure or pressure gradient limit.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2259

--- Page 11 ---

ITER Physics Basis
2.1.3. Ideal MHD: wall stabilization eects
The linear operator governing ideal MHD is self-
adjoint and, hence, the growth rate for the mostunstable mode can be obtained by minimization ofa variational form. However, for kink modes, theresults of this type of calculation can be sensitive tothe assumption made about the location of the per-fectly conducting shell (usually called a wall), whichis assumed in the theory to surround the plasma and
which provides the boundary condition of zero tan-
gential electric eld at the wall surface that idealMHD theory requires. Accordingly, kink stability cal-culations typically include an examination of theeects of wall position, which can (in theory) rangefrom at or even inside the plasma surface to very dis-tant: ‘wall at innity’. For assessment of kink modestability, three types of boundary conditions can typ-ically be employed:
(1) a xed, perfectly conducting wall lying within
the separatrix and coinciding with a plasmamagnetic surface;
(2) a xed, perfectly conducting wall outside the
separatrix with an intervening vacuum region
and a deformable plasma boundary lying inside(or at) the separatrix; and
(3) the same as (2) but with the wall at innity.
Boundary conditions (2) and (3) promote greater
instability, since a vacuum region can support a par-allel electric eld and, thus, is less constrained thana pressureless plasma with E
k=0 .
Ballooning modes are typically localized in minor
radius well within the plasma, and hence their stabil-ity is usually insensitive to assumptions about wallposition or presence.
From a viewpoint of interpreting experimental
data for the onset of kink modes, the most conser-vative assumption is to place the wall ‘at innity’.This placement is also consistent with the fact thatin experiments, while there are conducting structuresclose to plasma, the resistance of these structures isnite and, hence, the ultimate stability of kink modesshould not be aected. However, there are exam-ples of kink stable plasma operation at beta values
that exceed the ‘wall at innity’ ideal MHD limit. In
these cases, the resulting improvement in stabilitycan be ascribed to the eects of the ‘wall stabiliza-tion’ that arises owing to the presence of a conduct-ing wall close to the plasma. Wall stabilization canbe enhanced by the eects of mode rotation: at asuciently high angular velocity, such rotation can
inhibit growth of the kink instability, at least for the
time of plasma operation under consideration. Fur-
ther discussion of wall stabilization issues and of theimportance of the resistive wall mode will be foundin Section 2.4.
2.1.4. Ideal MHD stability limits:
theory and experiment
Ideal MHD theory has been shown to adequately
predict the upper bound for the beta limit obtainablein present day tokamak discharges, where it is foundempirically that the limit set by onset of ideal MHDinstability in situations where wall stabilization andsawtooth instability eects are not signicant and
where other non-ideal MHD beta limiting modes are
not present or do not grow to large amplitude (seeSection 2.3) is reasonably well described by [9]

N;max 3:5( 1 )
where
N=(%)=[I(MA)=a(m)B(T)]
is the so-called ‘normalized beta’. Figure 3 illustrates
typical data that support Eq. (1). The upper bound
on normalized beta achieved in a broad range of toka-
maks with both circular and shaped plasma cross-sections is 3 
N4. This general result is com-
monly referred to as the ‘Troyon’ or ideal MHD betalimit.
As Fig. 3 shows, there can be variation in the data
obtained in a given tokamak at xed I=aB,a n dm o r e
detailed study shows that the limit on obtainablebeta is better described by [10]

N;max 4li (2)
whereliis the plasma internal inductance. The
underlying eect here is the degree of radial peak-ing of the plasma current density prole j(r):l
iis a
measure of the degree of prole peaking. Since theinternal inductance of typical plasmas with q(0)=1
andq
edgeorq95= 3{4 isli=0:8{1.0, Eqns (1) and
(2) give equivalent beta limits for such plasmas. How-
ever, for plasmas with higher edge qand/or higher
or lower axial q, Eq. (2) provides a better description
of the ideal MHD beta limit. As Fig. 4 demonstrates,Eq. (2) provides a relatively good description of thelimiting normalized beta obtained in both positiveand negative shear plasmas (see Section 2.7), the
2260
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 12 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
12
10
86
4
2
0
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.50PBX-MDIII-DDIII-D
PBX-M
JFT-2
T-11
DIIIJT60-U
I/aB (MA/T *m)Æbæ (%)3.5 I/aB
ITERPDX
ISX-B
TFTRJET
ASDEX
Figure 3. Volume average versusI=aB.T h es h a d e d
regions show the range of beta obtained in the respec-tive experiments. Selected individual high- data are also
shown. The limit on attainable maximum is described
by 3hi(%)=[I(MA)=a(m)B(T)]4, and is consistent
with ideal MHD stability. Note that some data appre-ciably exceed 
N=3:5. The basis for this is ascribed
either to variations in the plasma current prole (see textbelow) or to the eect of wall stabilization (Section 2.4).
latter with q(0) substantially above unity and hence
with lower li.
Ideal beta limits are typically obtained in ‘short
pulse’ experiments in which heating power is su-cient to produce a continuous rise in beta that isultimately terminated by onset of rapidly growingMHD instability and subsequent disruption. In such
cases, it is often not possible to sustain the highest
levels of beta that are obtained at the end of thepulse [11]. Figure 5 shows a representative compar-ison of ‘short pulse, high heating power‘ and ‘longpulse, lower heating power’ discharges in otherwisesimilar plasmas: a disruptive (‘hard’) ideal MHDbeta limit is reached in the short pulse discharge,whereas the long pulse discharge with reduced butslowly increasing heating power eventually encoun-
ters a lower ‘non-ideal’ soft (connement degrada-
tion) beta limit owing to onset of a saturated m=2 ,
n= 1 neoclassical island tearing mode (see Sec-
tion 2.3). The dierent beta limits obtained in thetwo cases are ascribed, respectively, to ideal and non-ideal MHD eects.0.6 0.8 1.0 1.22345
libNbN = 4.4 li
strong negative shearweak or positive shear
Figure 4. Nversus internal inductivity liin DIII-
D. Maximum Nobtainable in both positive and neg-
ative shear plasmas increases with li, and is bounded by
N;max=4li.
10
5
0
24
0
24
0
1.8 3.88464384643
84643
8614486144
86144
2.0 2.2 2.6 2.4 2.83.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Time (s)4 li
bNPNB (MW)
Disruptionm = 2, n = 1
MHD onset
Figure 5. ‘Ideal‘ and ‘Non-ideal’ beta limits in oth-
erwise similar DIII-D plasmas: the high heating powerdischarge (84643) reaches a disruptive ideal beta limit at
N4li4:4a f t e r 0.2 s; the lower power long pulse
discharge (86144) with otherwise similar parameters has
onset of an m=2 ,n= 1 ‘neoclassical tearing mode’ and
a ‘soft’ beta limit at N2a f t e r 1.5 s (see Section 2.3).
The onset of a non-ideal beta limit in long pulse
quasi-stationary discharges is not inevitable: Fig. 6shows a long pulse H-mode plasma obtained in JETwhere the beta obtained { limited in the exampleshown by the available heating power { lies onlyslightly below the ideal MHD limit. At lower toroidal
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2261

--- Page 13 ---

ITER Physics Basis
eld, similar MHD stable long pulse JET discharges
with aNof up to the ideal limit of 4 have been
obtained [12]. In these plasmas, the experimentally
measured pressure gradient is found to be near or atthe pressure gradient for the onset of ideal balloon-ing instability (Fig. 7). These types of data indicatethat these plasmas are well optimized with regardto attainment of maximum beta: the plasma is veryclose to the onset of ideal MHD ballooning instabilityover most of the cross-section, and the 
Nfor onset of
external kink instability exceeds the Nfor balloon-
ing onset. The attainment of this type of ‘optimized’
ideal MHD ballooning stability does not always occurautomatically (see, for example, the less than opti-mal ballooning stability characteristics of the high-l
i‘advanced performance’ plasmas described in Sec-
tion 2.7).
20
10
0Power (MW)
RFNBI
5
3
1Energy (MJ)
3
2
1
0Electron density
( nedl,1020 m-2)1.0
0.6
0.2
Da intensity  (a.u.)
14 16 18 20 22  24
Time (s)total
bN
03
Figure 6. ITER simulation discharge in JET (1.7 T,
1.7 MA,N;max 3, limited by available heating power);
see Ref. [12].
Similar long pulse stable H-modes with Nup
to at least 3 are also obtained in DIII-D [13] andJT-60U [14]. The lack of a non-ideal limit in theseexamples appears to be related to the absence of a
large enough sawtooth amplitude to trigger growth of
neoclassical tearing modes. This observation suggeststhat avoidance of sawteeth or limitation of the mag-nitude of sawtooth and/or ELM activity may allowreactor tokamak operation up to the ideal beta limit(see Sections 2.2 and 2.3).Normalized radius [( yo-y)/(yo-ya)]0.50 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.000.20.40.60.81.0Ballooning instability threshold ( a/q2)
Ballooning unstable
Ballooning stable
a/q2(measured)JET # 40565 ( bN = 3.8)
Figure 7. Measured and calculated ideal MHD bal-
looning onset threshold =q2for a JET ‘ITER simu-
lation discharge’ with N=3:8 that operates stably
just below the ideal MHD beta limit (see Ref. [12]).Here,=−rp=(B
2
T=20R) is the toroidal eld nor-
malized pressure gradient. The MHD calculation showsthat the plasma is close to or at marginal ideal MHDballooning stability over nearly the whole cross-section.
The calculated threshold for external kink instability is

N=5:2.
2.1.4.1. Extrapolation of experimental results
to ITER
For typical ITER parameters of q953a n dH -
mode current density proles [15], the expected inter-nal inductance lies in the range 0 :8l
i1:0a n d
Eq. (2) predicts
3N;max (ITER )4:
Given that N3 already corresponds to attain-
ment in ITER of fusion powers of approximately3 GW, or more than twice the design basis for theplasma particle and power handling systems, theideal MHD beta limit situation for ITER seems quite
secure.
2.1.4.2. ITER ideal MHD stability analyses
The conclusions about ITER ideal MHD limits
inferred from extrapolation of experimental resultsare conrmed by more specic numerical studiesof ITER ideal MHD stability [15]. Here, variousideal MHD stability codes { TORUS, PEST, KINX,
2262
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 14 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
GATO and ERATO { were systematically compared
against each other and applied for the study of ITER
stability for L-mode and H-mode proles. Agreement
among the codes is found to be excellent, with uni-form prediction { subject to certain modelling basiscaveats about how H-mode proles are truncatednear the plasma edge { of ideal beta limits sucientfor operation of ITER at fusion powers of 2.5 GW orgreater. The codes also uniformly predict high- nbal-
looning instability rather than low- nkink instability
as the more limiting eect, and hence, the possibil-
ity of a ‘soft’ (prole modication and connement
degradation) rather than ‘hard’ (immediately disrup-tive) manifestation of the ideal beta limit. However,as is often observed in present experiments, onset ofa ‘soft’ ballooning initiated limit can lead eventually,or even promptly, to disruption, so either manifes-tation of ideal MHD instability in ITER may wellresult in disruption.
The pressure and current density proles used
for the comparison exercise and the various ITERstudies were derived either from PRETOR trans-port code modelling for ITER L-mode and H-mode
plasmas [16,17] or from ‘experimental proles’ taken
from transport analysis and equilibrium inversion ofa DIII-D ITER like H-mode discharge with 
N=2:1
[18]. The proles used as the starting basis for theITER studies corresponded to specic values of 
N:
proles for lower or higher Nwere generated from
the original proles by a multiplying factor for thepressure proles and maintenance of the current den-sity
hjBihBri
−1
where hi denotes a ﬂux surface volume average.
Current density proles were also adjusted to keepq1:05 everywhere, leaving the stability assessment
complications associated with q(0)<1:0( s e ef o l -
lowing discussion) for separate consideration. Wallat innity boundary conditions were used for kinkmodes, and for kink mode stability assessment, theplasma proles were truncated inside the separatrixat aqvalueq
s4:0.
As expected, the predicted beta limits depend
somewhat on assumptions about the plasma proles.For L-mode proles, where the edge plasma pressure
gradient is low, stability up to 
N=3:4 for balloon-
ing and up to N=4:4 for kinks was found [16].
For H-mode proles, assessment of the stability sit-uation is less straightforward owing to the eect ofpressure gradient driven bootstrap current near theseparatrix. This makes the predicted external kinklimit sensitive to exactly where the current prole is
truncated in the stability assessment. In some of the
calculations, the current prole was arbitrarily trun-
cated at 95% ﬂux. However, a study of truncationsensitivity with the KINX code, which is capable ofextending the prole modelling basis to the separa-trix, shows that truncating the proles just insideq
s=4y i e l d s N2 as opposed to an apparently
converged value of N4:5 obtained for truncation
atqs>4(>98% ﬂux) [16] (Fig. 8). This result
shows the importance in kink stability assessments
of modelling the current prole out to the separatrix
and in incorporating, as accurately as possible, theprole of the localized bootstrap current associatedwith the H-mode edge pressure gradient. These con-siderations make assessment of the kink stability ofITER plasmas somewhat sensitive to detailed predic-tion of the ITER H-mode edge characteristics, espe-cially the bootstrap current prole near the plasmaedge, a matter that is still the subject of ongoingexperimental and theoretical study and debate with
the edge physics community (see Chapter 4).
q = 4
0.90014
268
41012
0.92 0.94 0.96 0.98 1.00
Yfracb(0)
Æbæ
bNBeta (%) or bN (%*m*T/MA)ITER n = 1 beta limits for H-mode profiles
Figure 8. Beta limits for n= 1 external kink modes as
a function of  frac, the poloidal ﬂux fraction associated
with truncation for H-mode proles. Truncation outsideofq4( 
frac0:98) leads to a converged value of the
beta limit.
Kink stability predictions for the two basis pro-
les (PRETOR or DIII-D) also diered somewhat.For KINX calculations based on PRETOR proles,
the stability limit is reached at 
N=4:9, whereas
GATO results based on the DIII-D proles foundthe limit to be 
N=3:0. The KINX calculations
further showed almost equivalent limiting Nvalues
forn=2a n dn= 3 kinks. For ballooning modes, sev-
eral studies [15] showed that the PRETOR proles
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2263

--- Page 15 ---

ITER Physics Basis
were free of ballooning instabilities up to N=3:5.
The DIII-D proles, on the other hand, exhibited
a very small region in minor radius that was only
marginally stable to ballooning at N=2:1 [18]. Pre-
sumably, minor readjustments of the pressure prolewould eliminate this region of potential instability.
The overall conclusion from the various ITER spe-
cic code studies is that the ideal stability limit forITER plasmas with q(0)1:05 will be
N3. This
is sucient to allow ITER plasma operation with
2.5 GW of fusion power (see, for example, Section 1,Fig. 1) and a peak neutron wall loading approaching2M W m
−2. As is explained below, these calculations
withq(0) = 1:05 are believed to provide an adequate
basis for assessing the ideal stability of ITER andother reactor tokamak plasmas with q(0)1.
2.1.4.3. Ideal MHD stability for q(0)1
The reference operation mode for ITER is with
a sawtoothing ELMy H-mode, so such plasmas will
haveq(0)<1. Modelling of sawtooth activity (see
Section 2.2) shows that long period sawteeth withq(0)0:8 can be expected. All of the ITER spe-
cic code calculations show that when q(0)<1,
t h eo n s e tv a l u eo f 
Nat which the ideal n=1
kink instability rst develops decreases and an addi-tional
Nrange of kink instability that lies below the
q(0)1o n s e tNthreshold value (typically 4{5)
appears. For the PRETOR proles and q(0) = 0:8,
the additional range for kink instability is large:the range 1 :0
N4:9 becomes unstable.
Similar results were found for the DIII-D proles:the range 1 :0
N3:0 becomes unstable for
q(0) = 0:95 (see [18], and also Fig. 9). However,
in the course of these studies, it was found thatthe growth rates and eigenfunctions for the unsta-ble mode in the additional 
Nrange dier signi-
cantly from the growth rates and eigenfunctions for
the external kinks that are unstable with q(0)1:05.
Withq(0)1:05, the growth rate and eigenfunc-
tion become insensitive to q(0), and the limiting N
is interpreted as being a manifestation of the ideal
external kink instability. In the additional range ofunstable
Nthat develops for q(0)<1, growth rates
are lower and the eigenfunction displacements areconcentrated in the region q1:0. These modes are
interpreted as manifestations of ideal internal kink
instability.
Figure 8 illustrates these properties. The dier-
ences in the mode eigenfunctions with q(0)>1o r
q(0)<1 are clearly visible. Beyond these dierencesin the eigenfunction, analyses with additional kinetic
eects incorporated make a profound change in the
q(0)<1 growth rates [16]. Accordingly, the interpre-
tation is that the additional 
Nrange associated with
q(0)<1 is an element in a more complete, non-ideal
MHD theory of ( m;n)=( 1;1) modes and sawteeth.
Section 2.2 discusses these modes and the ITER saw-tooth model in detail. For purposes of quantifying theITER ideal kink beta limit, the conclusion reachedfrom the ITER ideal MHD studies [18] is that the 
N
limit corresponding to q(0) = 1:05 should be taken as
the eective ideal MHD limit. This interpretation is
conrmed by DIII-D data, where modication of theqprole to produce q>1 is necessary and sucient
to obtain ideal MHD stability at the experimental
N.
As has been noted above, in ITER, the principal
eect of sawteeth and q(0)<1 is expected to enter
through the role of the sawtooth reconnection act-ing as a trigger of neoclassical tearing modes, with
a consequent reduction in the beta limit. Details of
sawtooth characteristics and the expected sawtoothmagnitude in ITER are presented in Section 2.2.The result presented therein is that owing to theeects of alpha particle stabilization of the saw-tooth reconnection, relatively long period ( 100 s)
sawteeth are expected, and sawtooth triggering ofneoclassical tearing mode growth is likely (see Sec-tion 2.3). Accordingly, it may be necessary to pro-vide localized current drive near the q=1s u r f a c e
to modify the local magnetic shear so as to destabi-
lize sawtooth reconnection and, thus, limit sawtoothperiod and magnitude (see Sections 2.2.5 and 2.2.6).
2.1.5. Other MHD stability considerations
Various other MHD eects and stability consid-
erations that involve both ideal and non-ideal MHDenter into setting limits on plasma current, pressureor pressure gradients. These limits, which tend toapply to localized regions of the plasma (e.g. theplasma edge region just inside the separatrix) and/orto more specic phases of a tokamak discharge (e.g.the H-mode phase or the low density start-up phase)
may be more restrictive than the global ideal MHD
stability and beta limits addressed above. The spe-cialized considerations that are most directly rele-vant to ITER are addressed in detail in several fol-lowing subsections. Here, several of the importanteects are brieﬂy introduced.
2264
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 16 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
q(0) = 0.95
q(0) = 1.05with wall 
with wall no wall no wall 
1 23 4 5 000.20.40.6Normal displacement ( x.Ñy)
bN1 23 4 5 0
bN Growth rate ( g/gA)2    (10-2)
q(0) = 0.95q(0) = 1.05 bN (expt)bN (expt)
00.51.01.5
n = 1 mode, DIII-D profiles n = 1 mode, DIII-D profiles
Figure 9. Computed n= 1 mode growth rate and edge normal displacement as a function of
increasingN,f o rq(0)<1a n dq(0)>1, with and without the presence of a stabilizing conducting
wall (see Ref. [18]). The pressure proles and wall position used for this calculation are derivedfrom DIII-D discharge 82205 at 3665 ms. The 
Nof the experimental discharge, which was ideal
MHD stable, is indicated: other Nvalues examined in the calculation were obtained by scaling
the experimental prole as explained in the text. The nite growth rate and mode amplitude forq(0) = 0:95 and
N3 are ascribed to an internal rather than external mode. The presence or
absence of a wall has no eect on the comparative instability of the q(0)<1 case. The applicable
ideal MHD external kink pressure for instability inferred from this analysis is N3.
2.1.5.1. Edge localized modes
ELMs are associated with edge pressure gradients
near the ballooning limit [19] and are thought toinvolve ideal MHD modes with toroidal mode num-bers in the range 5{10. Since the displacement eldof the mode eigenfunction is localized to the plasmaperiphery, these modes have come to be known as‘peeling modes’. Experimentally, ELMs do not serveas a major limitation on plasma pressure and cur-
rent, but take the form of a series of relaxation events
that prevent large regions of steep gradients in the H-mode transport barrier (see Chapters 2 and 4) fromforming. MHD stability models for peeling modesand ELMs are just now being developed, as aremodels for the pre-ELM edge equilibrium with self-consistent bootstrap currents. The MHD aspects ofELMs and the role that ideal MHD plays in deter-mining ELM characteristics are discussed in Sec-
tion 2.6
2.1.5.2. MHD stability in reverse shear plasmas
The leading candidate for high bootstrap fraction,
steady state tokamak operation in ITER is a reverseshear conguration [20] (see also Section 2.7). Simul-taneous ideal MHD stability with respect to exter-nal kink and ballooning modes and also the so-called‘infernal’ mode (a mixed mode localized at interme-
diate plasma minor radius that combines kink and
ballooning characteristics, see Section 2.7) requires(in theory) careful optimization of pressure and cur-rent density proles [16]. The degree to which ade-quately stable proles can be realized and sustainedwith non-inductive means in reactor or ITER scaleplasmas remains an open R&D issue.
For steady state reversed shear scenarios, the
ideal MHD external kink mode is a considerablethreat owing to the high current densities that suchplasmas have near the wall (Section 2.4). Reverse
shear plasmas have broad current proles ( l
i=0:5)
and, hence, per Eq. (2), a low ideal MHD beta limit.Explicit stability modelling and most experimentaldata to date conrm this (see Section 2.7). Withouta conducting wall, an ideal limiting 
Nof 2.5 is
predicted for representative ITER reverse shearplasmas, as opposed to 
N=3:5{4 needed for
Q= 15 driven burn at 1.5 GW fusion power. The
ITER wall would be capable of providing the needed
stability were it not for the ‘resistive wall’ mode
(Section 2.4). The rotation necessary to stabilizethis mode is a matter of theoretical controversy andexperimental investigation, but it may turn out thatMHD feedback control of the resistive wall mode isrequired. While such control is straightforward in
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2265

--- Page 17 ---

ITER Physics Basis
principle, its implementation in ITER could be a
signicant engineering challenge.
Section 2.4 presents a separate discussion of the
physics of the resistive wall mode, the eects ofplasma rotation needed to stabilize it and possiblemeans for feedback stabilization. Such matters arepresently the subjects of both experimental and the-oretical scrutiny.
Mercier stability of reversed shear plasmas may
also be an issue. In reversed magnetic shear plasmas,the Mercier criterion can be violated from the plasmacentre to the region with the large pressure gradientdue to the internal transport barrier (ITB), when thevalue of (q
0−qmin)=qminis high [21]. Here qmin<q 0
(axialq) is the minimum value of the safety factor.
The mechanism of destabilization is that the reversedmagnetic shear makes the parallel current term
unstable and reduces the magnetic well term. The
domain of Mercier instability is characterized by thevalues of
pand (q0−qmin)=qmin.A s(q0−qmin)=qmin
increases, the corresponding value of the stable p
decreases, so that for strong reverse shear (i.e. for
a deeply hollow current prole), the Mercier modeis predicted to be unstable. In reverse shear plas-mas produced with NBI during current ramp-up inJT-60U, repetitive pressure gradient limiting MHDactivity localized near the resulting ITB (termed
barrier localized modes or BLMs) is observed [22].
Analysis shows that the Mercier stability criterionis violated near the ITB, and, hence, Mercier insta-bility may be responsible for the BLMs. If BLMsare to be avoided in future reactor tokamaks andin ITER, operation with low ( q
0−qmin)=qmin, i.e.
with only weak reverse shear, appears to be required.This requirement may limit the range of achievable‘advanced performance’ plasma operation regimes.
2.1.5.3. MHD eects of non-axisymmetry
All of the analysis and discussion above is pred-
icated on an assumption of axisymmetry for theinitial plasma equilibrium and external tokamakelds. However, there are a number of experimen-tal and theoretical issues that exist with regard tothe susceptibility of tokamak discharges to degrada-tion caused by deviations from strict axisymmetry
in the structures generating the external, conning
magnetic elds. These error elds, which can act tobrake and ultimately stop the normal rotation of thesaturated internal magnetic islands that are presentin most tokamak plasmas, can lead to non-rotatingmagnetic island structures (‘mode locking’), whichthen spontaneously grow to large amplitude, ulti-
mately leading to disruption. The occurrence of this
type of disruption (locked mode disruption) is most
common during the low density ‘start-up’ phase ofohmic discharges, but mode locking can also aectthe feasibility of reliable operation near the ideal orneoclassical island beta limit and can also play a rolein the non-linear mode growth phase that precedesdisruption. The mechanism that is responsible for therapid growth of locked modes is not well understood,but must be non-ideal as mode topology changes are
evident. Section 2.5 addresses the eects and impli-
cations of locked modes and error eld eects forreactor tokamaks and ITER.
2.1.6. Summary and application to ITER
The theory of ideal MHD stability has been devel-
oped to a high degree of computational sophistica-tion and has been found to accurately describe thecircumstances in which external kink and balloon-
ing instabilities develop in tokamak plasmas. Ideal
MHD alone constitutes the basis for the experimen-tal observation that kink and/or ballooning instabil-ity onset { usually followed by disruption { devel-ops in most cases for 3 
N4 (i.e. at the ideal
MHD or Troyon beta limit) or for N>4li.T h eo n l y
signicant exception to the ubiquitous presence ofthese two equivalent manifestations of the ideal MHDbeta limit are in certain cases in present experimentswhere a combination of sucient plasma rotation
and the presence of a nearby conducting wall make
sustained operation above the Troyon limit possible,at least for periods commensurate with present toka-mak pulse durations.
Simulation of sustained ‘long pulse’ (hardware
limited duration and/or pressure) plasmas with nor-
malized betas approaching the ideal MHD beta
limit have been obtained with ‘ITER like’ betalimit demonstration discharges in a number of toka-maks. These ITER demonstration discharges, empir-ical extrapolation of beta limit data to ITER condi-tions, and explicit detailed modelling of the MHDstability of candidate ITER plasma proles, all con-rm that the limit on attainable plasma pressure inITER H-mode plasmas is expected to be 
N3.
SinceN= 3 is already sucient to allow ITER
operation with fusion powers of up to 2.5 GW (170%of the design basis fusion power), ideal MHD instabil-ity and the corresponding beta limit are not expectedto directly restrict ITER operation with respect toattainable fusion power.
2266
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 18 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Other non-ideal (resistive/neoclassical) aspects of
MHD instability may, however, set more restrictive
power limits. In addition, the magnitude and period
of sawtooth reconnection in q(0)<1I T E Rp l a s m a s
is expected to have a potentially signicant eecton the overall stability and attainable beta in ITERplasmas. While the occurrence of sawtooth recon-nection is clearly attributable to internal ideal MHDkink instability, the attainment of ideal MHD betalimits in sawtoothing plasmas that are theoreticallyexpected to be ideal MHD unstable shows that non-
ideal resistive and/or kinetic MHD eects must be
taken into account to understand the role that saw-teeth and internal kink (and also likely Mercier inter-change) instabilities play in present and future high-plasmas.
2.2. Non-ideal MHD: sawtooth oscillations
and central MHD activity
Non-ideal (resistive and/or kinetic) MHD eects
enter in a signicant manner in setting further lim-itations on achievable plasma beta and other core{plasma and edge{plasma operational limits in reac-tor tokamaks and in ITER. This Section and the
ve following Sections address six of the most impor-
tant non-ideal MHD considerations: sawtooth oscilla-tions (Section 2.2); neoclassical island tearing modesand beta limits (Section 2.3); wall stabilization ofexternal kink modes and resistive wall modes (Sec-tion 2.4); non-axisymmetric error elds and modelocking eects (Section 2.5); ideal and resistive MHDin the plasma edge (Section 2.6); and MHD stabilityof reversed shear and other ‘advanced performance’
modes of plasma operation (Section 2.7).
2.2.1. Sawtooth oscillations
Sawtooth oscillations, the periodic MHD initiated
mixing events that occur in a tokamak plasma inthe near axis region where the safety factor qis less
than or equal to unity, are an often present featureof tokamak plasma operation. The reference plasmaoperation mode for ITER is predicated upon thepresence of repetitive sawtooth oscillations, and thecorresponding near axis mixing eects of the oscil-lations are taken into account in making estimates
of the plasma energy and particle connement (see
Chapter 2, Section 5). Figure 10 illustrates several ofthe key observable global features of sawtooth oscilla-tions, including the characteristic sawtooth like tem-perature (or soft X-ray emission) waveforms that givethe oscillations their common name ( sawteeth ). Thegure also shows the changes in the plasma temper-
ature and safety factor proles that occur immedi-
ately after the sawtooth crash { the internal magnetic
reconnection event { that eects the rapid mixing ofthe axial and peripheral regions of the plasma corethat occurs at the end of each sawtooth cycle.
As the waveforms in Fig. 10 illustrate, the immedi-
ate eect of the mixing is contained within a sawtooth
mixing radius that lies somewhat outside the nom-
inalq= 1 radius. The exact radial position of the
mixing radius depends on the sawtooth parameters(period and pre-crash value of the on-axis qand the
degree of internal reconnection, see following discus-
sion), but is typically 25{50% of the minor radius.
There is also a sawtooth inversion radius located
near the radius of the q= 1 ﬂux surface. The phase
(sign) of the temperature and safety factor oscilla-tions inverts outside of this radius, showing that theenergy and current located inside the q=1s u r f a c e
are rapidly transported outwards to the q>1p o r -
tion of the mixing region when the sawtooth crashoccurs.
The mixing eects of sawtooth oscillations are
largely conned to a central region of the plasmacore, and while the near axis ﬂuctuations in plasma
temperature, local energy content and current den-
sity that sawtooth oscillations produce are apprecia-ble, the incremental net transport of energy beyondthe sawtooth aected region is minimal. For this rea-son, sawtooth oscillations typically have a benigneect on plasma energy connement (see Section 5 ofChapter 2) and also provide a benet with respect toparticle connement that comes from their ability toreverse the on-axis accumulation of higher- Zimpuri-
ties that would otherwise tend to accumulate in the
plasma core and cause degradation of energy conne-
ment owing to excessive impurity radiation. Accord-ingly, selection of plasma operation strategies (ini-tial density, gas injection rate, and current rise wave-form, see Chapter 8) that result in early onset of saw-toothing is a well known means for obtaining optimalperformance in ohmic and auxiliary heated tokamakplasmas. However, as will be described below, thereare exceptions to this preference for early onset of
sawtoothing or for the presence of sawteeth at all,
and alternate plasma operation strategies whereinsawteeth are either absent or are delayed past thetime of optimum plasma performance also exist andmay be relevant to ITER.
Sawtooth oscillations are expected to play an
important role in ITER, not so much because oftheir direct impact on connement (discussed in
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2267

--- Page 19 ---

ITER Physics Basis
0 1r/aq = 1after crashSafety Factor (q) Safety Factor (q)
0 1r/abefore crash
after crashTemperature (T) Temperature (T)Inversion 
radius (rinv)Mixing 
radius (rmix)
Inversion 
radius (rinv)time
timer = 0r > rinvr > rmix
r = 0
r > rinv
r > rmix
 crash crash
Mixing region
(r < rmix, directly 
affected by saw-tooth reconnection)Plasma column
r = 0r = abefore crash
 rinv
 rmix
Figure 10. Schematic illustration of sawtooth oscillation features: temperature and safety factor
prole waveforms and evolution in an idealized circular cross-section tokamak plasma. See the
gures in Section 2.2.6 for similar data from simulations of ITER sawteeth.
Section 2.5 of Chapter 2), but because of the pos-
sible couplings between sawteeth and other (non-ideal) MHD activity. For example, recent experimen-tal evidence from DIII-D [23] suggests that sawteethmay induce seed islands for the growth of neoclassi-cal tearing modes. Furthermore, sawteeth may cou-ple to locked modes and edge perturbations such asELMs and external kinks [24], and concerns havebeen raised that these couplings, which can lead toonset of disruption (see Section 4.1), may eectively
limit the achievable value of beta in ITER. On the
other hand, there is considerable evidence that saw-teeth do not necessarily have to set restrictive per-formance or beta limits: recent ITER demonstrationexperiments on JET [12] and long pulse demonstra-tion plasmas in other tokamaks [13,14] indicate thatsawtooth activity at ITER relevant dimensionlessparameters is either absent or, if present, does notunduly impact plasma performance or lead to disrup-
tion. In addition, sawteeth in ITER can potentially
be controlled by the current drive and auxiliary heat-ing methods that are to be provided.
The underlying mechanism responsible for the
sawtooth crash is MHD instability of an internalkink mode. Within the context of ideal MHD, thisinstability is predicted to develop whenever the valueof the safety factor qin the central plasma regiondrops below unity. Here, it is worth recalling that the
theoretical, ideal MHD beta limit, 
MHD, assumes
optimal proles where, in particular, q>1e v e r y -
where (see Section 2.1). When qdrops below unity,
a new class of ideal MHD instabilities are predictedto occur for <
MHD, with internal kinks being
one. However, it is clear from experiments that idealMHD theory alone is not accurate in predicting thethreshold for the onset of the sawtooth crash. Forinstance [25], sawtooth crashes can be suppressed for
long periods in discharges where a signicant popu-
lation of high energy ions is present, despite valuesofq
0q(0)<1 and despite values of the thermal
plasma poloidal beta, p, well in excess of the thresh-
old value for ideal internal kinks [26,27]. Considera-tion of non-ideal MHD eects is necessary to under-stand sawtooth behaviour, particularly the thresholdfor reconnection and the resulting sawtooth periodand amplitude.
In order to address these issues quantitatively, in
the following we review, brieﬂy, present understand-
ing of the ideal and non-ideal MHD aspects of saw-
tooth phenomenon and summarize the results of acurrent model for the prediction of the sawtoothperiod and amplitude in ITER. Possible means ofsawtooth control in ITER will also be brieﬂy men-tioned.
2268
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 20 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
2.2.2. Ideal MHD considerations
The rst ideal MHD theoretical investigation of
internal kink modes in a straight cylindrical tokamak
was presented by Shafranov [28] in 1970. The conclu-sion was that ideal internal kinks become unstable ina straight tokamak as soon as qdrops below unity,
with the instability being an m=1 ,n=1r a d i a l
displacement that is nearly constant in the region
whereq1 and zero outside that region. Here,
mandnare the poloidal and toroidal mode num-
bers, and the internal kink is often referred to as them= 1 mode. When the experimental observation
of sawteeth was rst reported [29] three years later,internal kinks came to mind as the natural candi-date instability causing the rapid temperature col-lapse (the sawtooth crash). However, a non-linear
investigation by Rosenbluth et al. [30] showed that
ideal internal kinks would evolve into a kinked neigh-bouring equilibrium with a saturated displacement ofamplitude−r=Rand a singular current sheet on the
q= 1 surface. The conclusion here was that while the
basic nature of the sawtooth phenomenon could bequalitatively explained within the ideal MHD model,resistive eects would limit the current sheet and,therefore, need to be taken into account for moredetailed understanding.
2.2.3. Resistive and non-ideal MHD
In 1975, Bussac et al.[26] found that ideal internal
kinks were stable at low- 
pin toroidal equilibria with
qbelow unity, but instability at any pandq1
was re-established within the context of the resistiveMHD model by Coppi et al. [31]. Against this back-
ground, the rst consistent picture of the sawtoothphenomenon was formulated by Kadomtsev [32]. Inessence, the Kadomtsev model assumes that, after
the initial growth of a resistive or ideal internal kink
mode in the region where qis below unity, the sub-
sequent non-linear evolution is dominated by theresistive growth of an m= 1 magnetic island on
the characteristic time-scale 
K(AR)1=2,w h e r e
A=R=vAis the Alfv en time, and R=4a2=c2
is the resistive diusion time. This time-scale is typ-
ical of a two dimensional forced reconnection pro-cess, as discussed in the pioneering works by Sweet
[33] and Parker [34]. In order to re-establish a sta-
ble relaxed state with qabove unity everywhere, as
was deemed necessary for equilibrium against resis-tive internal kinks at that time, the m= 1 island
has to grow until it lls the entire volume where thepre-crashqis below unity, i.e. until all the helicalﬂux surfaces associated with q= 1 are reconnected.
Hence, the Kadomtsev model is also referred to as the
complete reconnection model. Kadomtsev derived a
prescription for the relaxed qprole as a function
of the pre-crash prole. The mixing radius, i.e. the
radius of the plasma region involved in the reconnec-tion process, is well dened within the Kadomtsevprescription.
The Kadomtsev model was not borne out of a
mathematical solution of the resistive MHD equa-
tions, i.e. it was, in part, conjectural. However,soon after the publication of Kadomtsev’s paper,two dimensional resistive MHD numerical simula-tions [35, 36] basically conrmed Kadomtsev’s pic-ture, which emerged as the standard model for thesawtooth phenomenon.
In 1978, Ara et al. [37] investigated the linear
theory ofm= 1 modes within the context of the
two-ﬂuid model, including high temperature eectssuch as diamagnetic frequency eects. The rst indi-cation of the possibility that resistive internal kinksmay become stable at high temperatures even withqbelow unity was given in [37]. However, possibly
because of the success of the Kadomtsev model, thispaper went unnoticed for a number of years.
2.2.4. Reconnection eects and
other considerations
In the 1980s, with the development of new and
better plasma diagnostics, a number of experimentalndings challenged the Kadomtsev model. The rsttomographic reconstruction of the soft X-ray emis-sivity prole from a sawtoothing plasma [38] sug-gested that the sawtooth crash could occur whilethem= 1 magnetic island was still relatively small.
Later, tomographic reconstructions of soft X-rays at
JET with improved time and space resolution [39]
were suggestive of a cold bubble penetrating the cen-tral plasma region rather then the growth of a largem= 1 island. Measurements of the qprole, on the
other hand, indicated that qon-axis remained below
unity throughout the sawtooth cycle [40], with someevidence of the formation of a shoulder of low mag-netic shear in the vicinity of the new q=1s u r -
face after a crash. These ndings pointed toward the
possibility of partial, as opposed to full, sawtooth
reconnection, and raised the question of the exis-tence of stable relaxed equilibria with qon-axis below
unity. For example, tomographic reconstructions onTFTR are suggestive of partial reconnection initi-ated by ballooning that develops in a toroidally and
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2269

--- Page 21 ---

ITER Physics Basis
poloidally localized region on the bad magnetic cur-
vature side of the plasma [41]. This mechanism pro-
vides only partial reconnection and is consistent with
the nding that q0is reported to stay below unity in
the same discharges [42]. However, not all experi-mental measurements of the qprole nd q
0below
unity [43]. Thus, the possibility that either partialor full reconnection can occur for dierent plasmaparameters cannot be ruled out.
Another challenge to the Kadomtsev model is
represented by measurements of the crash time[44], which turns out to be much shorter thanKadomtsev’s time, 
K. A more fundamental prob-
lem, raised by Wesson et al. [45], is the absence
of any detectable precursor activity in many hightemperature plasma discharges. Finally, a wide vari-ety of dierent sawteeth are observed, ranging from‘compound’ [44] to ‘giant’ [46] to ‘monster’ [25]sawteeth. The explanation of this variety of saw-
teeth poses a signicant challenge for any theory of
the sawtooth phenomenon. Empirical scaling lawsfor the sawtooth period and crash time have beenattempted: however, no scaling law that is able toreproduce the observed variety of sawteeth has beenfound [47].
In 1986, Wesson proposed the quasi-interchange
model of the sawtooth crash [48], which at rst
appeared consistent with the observed soft X-ray
emissivity prole at JET and with the rapidity ofthe crash time. However, the quasi-interchange insta-bility requires ultra-ﬂat qproles with q1i na
wide central region: this requirement is at odds withthe actual measurements of q. In addition, the quasi-
interchange model fails to provide a prediction forthe sawtooth period.
2.2.5. More recent understanding and
modelling bases
A new theoretical picture of the sawtooth phe-
nomenon is now emerging (see, for example, thereview paper by Migliuolo [49]). The cornerstone ofthis new understanding is the realization of the phys-ical processes that allow stable m=1m o d e si n
equilibria with q
0<1. The two-ﬂuid model of the
m= 1 instability, rst investigated in [37], was fully
explored in [50{52], which demonstrated the exis-
tence of stable equilibria with q0<1. Similar results
were also obtained in semi-collisional [53] and col-lisionless [54,55] models that are more realistic forthe high temperature plasmas produced in largertokamaks. For instance, the collisionless instabilitythreshold appears to be in good agreement with
TFTR L-mode and supershot data [56] (Fig. 11).
One of the crucial parameters in these models is the
magnetic shear at q= 1, which must exceed a crit-
ical threshold value for instability. Thus, a qprole
withq
0<1 and a shoulder of low magnetic shear
near theq= 1 surface should be stable according to
these models. Conversely, increasing the local mag-netic shear around q= 1 (e.g. by localized electron
cyclotron current drive) may be a way to trigger them= 1 instability. This latter factor may be useful in
ITER as a sawtooth ‘control’ mechanism to avoid the
occurrence of large amplitude sawteeth (see below).
No sawteeth
Sawteeth
Sawteeth + fishbones
UnstableStable
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.00.20.40.60.81.0
r(q=1)(dq/dr) q=1r(q=1)(dq/dr) critical
Figure 11. Comparison of predicted critical shear for
sawtooth onset with measured shear, both evaluated at
the measured q= 1 radius. Data for TFTR L-mode and
supershot plasmas, all with q(0)<1.
Another important factor in this emerging pic-
ture of the sawtooth phenomenon is the role playedby energetic ions. The discovery of sawtooth freeregimes in ICRH heated JET discharges, to whichthe somewhat misleading name of ‘monster’ sawteethhas been given [25], is widely believed to be the con-sequence of fast particle stabilization [57]. On theother hand, fast ions can interact resonantly with
m= 1 modes, giving rise to so-called ‘shbone oscil-
lation’ bursts of MHD activity [58] and correspond-ing increases in fast ion transport. The physics ofenergetic ions is discussed at length in Chapter 5,and, therefore, we shall not dwell on this topic inthis Section.
2270
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 22 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
The threshold condition for m=1m o d e si nr e l -
evant regimes and in equilibria with q0<1c a nb e
w r i t t e ni nt h ef o r m[ 5 9 ] W=Wcrit,w h e r eWis
an eective potential energy functional [26,27] mod-ied by the (stabilizing) kinetic eects related to thehigh energy ions [57] and to the thermal trappedions [60{62], while W
critis a critical threshold deter-
mined by microscopic eects (i.e. non-ideal eectssuch as resistivity, ion Larmor radius, electron skindepth, diamagnetic frequency, etc.) in a narrow layeraround the q= 1 surface, where reconnection of mag-
netic eld lines can occur. Detailed expressions for
WandW
critcan be found in [59].
T h ep r o b l e mo ft h er a p i d i t yo ft h es a w t o o t h
crash has been partly resolved in recent years. TheKadomtsev time-scale for the sawtooth crash is con-sistent with collisional regimes where the non-linearreconnection width, 
=(A=)1=2r1,i sw i d e rt h a n
the electron inertial skin depth, de=c=!e,w h e r er1
is the radius of the q= 1 surface, and =4r2
1=c2
is the characteristic resistive time-scale. In fact, the
opposite limit is realized in today’s high temperaturedischarges in large size tokamaks. In this collisionless
limit, a better estimate for the sawtooth crash time
is [63,64]
crashAr1=de, which is shorter than K
when<de. When the ion Larmor radius is larger
than the electron skin depth, the theoretical recon-nection time can be even shorter [54,65{67], reach-ing values comparable with the experimental crashtime.
The determination of the relaxed qprole after a
sawtooth crash is still an open question. In partic-ular, it is not clear under which circumstances par-tial rather than full reconnection can occur. Exist-ing three dimensional toroidal codes [68] assume the
resistive MHD model, and, therefore, are not capa-
ble of reproducing robustly stable relaxed equilibriawithq
0<1, since the existence of these equilibria
requires additional physics, as we have seen. Thus,these codes always return a relaxed qprole with
q1. This partly explains the slowness of progress
on this point.
In the absence of conclusive theoretical or experi-
mental evidence on the relaxed state, a phenomeno-logical viewpoint was adopted in [59]. There, it isconjectured that the sawtooth process always starts
with the growth of an m=n= 1 magnetic island.
However, instead of a laminar island growth as in
Kadomtsev’s model, it is assumed that widespreadmagnetic turbulence develops as the island reachesa critical size. Magnetic turbulence may come aboutbecause of the coupling of the m= 1 mode with thepoloidal modulation of the equilibrium [69], or, pos-
sibly, because of the secondary instability of modes,
such as tearing parity resistive g-modes [70] triggered
by the large pressure gradients that form across theseparatrix of the quickly growing m= 1 island. In
this region where chaotic elds co-exist with goodﬂux surfaces, the pressure is allowed to nearly ﬂat-ten up to a mixing radius, as observed in all experi-ments. Based on these premises, a partial reconnec-tion model is proposed in [59], which depends on asingle free parameter, w
crit=r1,w h e r ewcritis a crit-
ical island width for the onset of widespread mag-
netic turbulence. This resulting relaxed qhasq0<1
(except in the case where wcrit=r1!2, which cor-
responds to full reconnection) and a shoulder of lowshear around q= 1, which ensures stability against
m=1m o d e s .
Using these relaxed qand pressure proles as the
initial condition in a transport code, Wis normally
found to increase with time along the sawtooth rampuntil the critical threshold value, W
crit, is reached,
at which time a crash is imposed and the relaxedstate is recomputed. In this way, repetitive sawteethand a prediction for the sawtooth period can beobtained.
2.2.6. ITER sawtooth predictions and
control possibilities
The magnetic turbulence model described above
has been applied for simulations of ITER sawtoothbehaviour [59] (Fig. 12). A sawtooth period rangingbetween 50 s and 100 s in ignited ITER discharges isobtained. The relatively long sawtooth period pre-dicted for ITER (cf. 1 s in JET) arises due to
both the larger physical size of ITER and the sta-bilizing eect of the fast alpha population present
in an ignited or high- Qdriven burn plasma. The
sawtooth period is longer when Kadomtsev’s relax-ation is assumed and becomes shorter as the param-eterw
crit=r1of the incomplete reconnection model
decreases. In these simulations, the alpha particleand thermal trapped ion eects are found to beimportant and prevent sawtooth crashes from occur-ring until the q= 1 radius has reached about 50%
of the plasma minor radius (see Fig. 12). In this
sense, the simulated ITER sawteeth resemble the so-
called ‘monster sawteeth’ (large amplitude solitarysawteeth with a large reconnection radius) seen inJET [25], and the qprole evolves on the resistive
diusion time. Using this resistive diusion basis toextrapolate from the monster sawtooth period of a
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2271

--- Page 23 ---

ITER Physics Basis
few seconds at JET, one obtains a time-scale 0(100 s)
for ITER sawteeth. In the absence of the stabilizing
eects related to the fusion alpha particles and to
the thermal trapped ions, sawtooth crashes are pre-dicted to occur on the pressure peaking time-scale,which is 0(1 s) in ITER.
R (m) R (m)6789 1 0051015202530
6789 1 000.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Temperature (keV) Safety Factor
Before
After
BeforeAfter
Figure 12. Simulation (Ref. [59]) of plasma tempera-
ture and safety factor proles before and after sawtoothreconnection in a 1.5 GW ignited burn ITER plasma. SeeFig. 13 for time waveforms for this simulation.
Despite the large mixing radius and dramatic
change in the central plasma proles following recon-nection, the simulated global eects of such a saw-
tooth crash on fusion power, 
p, and internal induc-
tance,li, are small (Fig. 13), and even such ‘monster’
sawteeth are anticipated to have a negligible eect onplasma magnetic conguration control burn controlin ITER (see Chapter 8). However, large sawtoothcrashes with a mixing radius exceeding half of theplasma minor radius are still a cause for concern,since, as indicated in the beginning of this Section,and as is sometimes seem in present large size exper-iments, such crashes can trigger onset of neoclassical
modes and/or disruption. Prediction of the precise
amplitude threshold for sawtooth triggering of neo-classical modes in ITER is still a matter of study anddebate (see Section 2.2), but avoiding large sawteethappears to be prudent, and sawtooth free operationmay be needed. In this regard, scenarios in ITERhave been found where sawteeth can be avoided forperiods long enough to achieve sustained ignition andequilibrium burn, and, in addition, sawtooth ampli-
tude/period control by injected RF waves that mod-
ify the magnetic shear prole in the vicinity of q=1
appears to be possible.
A promising scenario is to delay the onset of saw-
teeth by applying early heating during the currentramp-up, in order to(i) increase the plasma electrical conductivity and
slow down the current penetration; and
(ii) achieve early ignition and exploit alpha par-
ticle stabilization before the onset of the rstsawtooth crash.
This early heating scenario was simulated in [59],
where a sawtooth free period of about 500 s wasobtained. With the application of central currentdrive, the onset of sawteeth can be delayed for upto 1200 s [71].
It may also be possible to control the sawtooth
amplitude and period in ITER by applying local-ized current drive so as to increase the magneticshear nearq= 1. This technique acts to trigger low
amplitude short period sawteeth and has been suc-
cessfully demonstrated at JET, where minority ioncurrent drive induced by ICRF waves was used [72].In ITER or future reactor tokamaks, similar ‘pre-emptive’ sawtooth control by ion cyclotron frequencyFWCD or by ECCD should be possible. Here, ECCDmay ultimately prove to be the most promising con-trol means due to the high localized current den-sities that can be achieved and the ability to pro-
vide real time control of the current drive location
by changing the launching angle of the injected ECbeam [73].
Another ideal MHD instability that can occur
whenqdrops below unity is that of localized inter-
change modes. The threshold condition for thesemodes is related to the well known Mercier crite-rion [74], which predicts instability at modest pres-sure gradients and beta values when qis below unity.
Thus, this instability is expected to limit the achiev-
able pressure gradients in the experiments. However,the Mercier stability criterion is often violated withimpunity in existing large size tokamak discharges.In [75], it is shown that the same non-ideal physicsthat explains the improved stability against internalkinks may also account for the absence of localizedinterchange modes in circumstances when the idealMHD threshold for these modes is exceeded in exper-
iments.
2.3. Non-ideal MHD: neoclassical island
tearing modes and beta limits
The importance of non-ideal MHD eects in deter-
mining the ultimate pressure achievable in longpulse tokamak experiments has become increasinglyapparent over the last few years. In particular, the
2272
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 24 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Alpha power (MW) Beta poloidal Internal inductance [ li(3)]
0 200 300 400100 0 200 300 400100 0 200 300 400 100Sawtooth onset
Sawtooth onset
Sawtooth onset
Time (s) Time (s)050100150200250300350
00.20.40.60.81,01.21.4
00.20.40.60.8
Time (s)
Figure 13. Simulation of ignition and sustained 1.5 GW burn in a 21 MA ITER plasma. The rst
sawtooth occurs about 200 s after initial heating and a stable 70 s period sawtooth cycle develops by
300 s. This cycle continues indenitely (the simulation here ends arbitrarily at 400 s). The plasma
proles before and after a sawtooth reconnection are shown in Fig. 12. The eect of the reconnectionon fusion power, 
p,a n dliis barely discernible.
eect of the bootstrap current on tearing mode sta-
bility in low collisionality long pulse plasmas is nowseen to be an important possible limiting factor forthe ultimate performance of reactor tokamaks and
ITER. The formation of neoclassical bootstrap cur-
rent driven islands (referred to hereafter as neoclas-sical islands), with subsequent limitation of achiev-able plasma pressure or onset of disruption, is theperformance limiting mechanism. The resulting ‘soft’(connement degradation) limit on achievable beta iscommonly referred to as the non-ideal or neoclassi-cal MHD beta limit. When quantied in terms of thenormalized beta

N=(%)a(m)I(MA)=B(T)
the neoclassical beta limit in an ITER class reac-
tor and in ITER is projected to be N;NC 2.
For ITER, this beta limit is comparable to what isrequired for 1.5 GW operation, and, hence, a non-ideal beta limit may constitute a potential limita-tion on achievable fusion power in ITER. A non-ideal limit of this magnitude would also restrict neu-tron wall loadings in future reactor tokamaks based
on conventional superconducting technology to rela-
tively modest values ( 1M W m
−2). Understanding
the physics of neoclassical island modes and nd-ing means for their avoidance or for limiting theirimpact on plasma performance are therefore impor-tant issues for reactor tokamaks and ITER.2.3.1. Neoclassical islands: observations,
theories and issues
Neoclassical islands were rst observed on TFTR
[76]. Subsequently, it was observed in many toka-maks that the beta limit at low collisionality ( 
)
was determined by low m=nmagnetic islands [77{79]
and was often well below the beta limit predicted byideal MHD stability theory. The MHD modes respon-sible have since all been identied as neoclassical
magnetic islands [23, 80, 81]. Pressure driven resis-
tive modes have been observed to limit on JT-
60U [14]. Recently, the beta limiting eects of neo-classical islands and details of the island structurehave also been observed in JET [82] and prelimi-nary MHD analysis of the JT-60U data conrms theneoclassical island origin of the beta limiting MHDmodes [83].
The existence of neoclassical islands was antici-
pated theoretically [84,85], but these early theoriespredicted instability for 
<1 at all rational sur-
faces and for all values of p. In contrast, the exper-
imental data typically show instability only on a fewrational surfaces and usually only at moderately high

p. The observation of a critical island width for
instability in [76] has lead to additional theoreticalwork on other non-ideal eects that tend to stabilizethe growth of the neoclassical islands and explainthe observed neoclassical mode onset eects. Twoeects in particular { the eect of the ion polariza-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2273

--- Page 25 ---

ITER Physics Basis
tion current [86,87], and the inﬂuence of cross island
transport [88] { have been identied that can explain
the observed ‘threshold’ island width and the typi-
cal need for moderately high pbefore neoclassical
modes develop.
The basic mechanism that drives neoclassical
islands is simple. If a magnetic island exists, the
radial pressure gradient inside that island is absent
(assuming the transport along eld lines dominatesthe transport across eld lines). The loss of this pres-sure gradient removes the drive for the bootstrapcurrent in the helical region inside the island separa-trix. The loss of the bootstrap current then furtherincreases the size of the island, which removes thepressure gradient over a wider region. This processcontinues until the drive from the bootstrap current
loss is balanced by the stabilizing eects of the equi-
librium bootstrap current gradient. The result is asaturated island with appreciable radial width, oftenlarge enough to appreciably aect the global energyand particle transport and sometimes large enoughto initiate disruption. Figure 14 shows a simulationof a hypothetical ‘worst case’ saturated 2,1 island inan ITER plasma. The parameters used for the simu-lation result in an eective island half width of about10% of the minor radius. The potential impact that
an island of this magnitude near the q=2s u r f a c e
can have on energy transport or to initiate disruptionis obvious.
The important issues for ITER, and indeed for
any future tokamak power plant, are
(1) which neoclassical island modes will be unsta-
ble (i.e. what physics determines the scalingof the thresholds and ‘seed island’ triggeringamplitude for neoclassical modes);
(2) what will be the saturated radial width of the
modes;
(3) what eect will these modes have on conne-
ment and the beta limit; and
(4) what are the prospects for avoiding the onset
of these modes or for controlling their growth?
Neoclassical tearing modes were rst experimen-
tally identied on TFTR [76]. The modes were iden-
tied by tting the time history of the measured
perturbed magnetic eld to the predictions of the‘modied Rutherford equation’, which determinesthe dynamics of neoclassical tearing mode growth[84,85]. The input parameters to the t were derivedfrom the measured local plasma parameters. The0.70.80.911.11.21.30.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.30.40.5
Normalized radius (R/R o)Normalized height (Z/R o)
Figure 14. Simulation of an m=2 ,n= 1 neoclassi-
cal island in an ignited ITER plasma. The low value ofthe tearing mode parameter 
0=−2:6 in this simula-
tion produces a large island that can be expected to havea signicant impact on energy transport and, hence, onachievable beta. (Simulation by Alexander Pletzer withthe PEST-3 stability code.)
existence and size of the magnetic islands were con-
rmed from analysis of electron cyclotron emissiondata. Similar identication procedures have beenrepeated on COMPASS-D, DIII-D and ASDEX-Upgrade [23, 80, 81]. Fits of the island width pre-
dicted by neoclassical tearing mode theory to the
island width calculated from the measured magneticperturbations ( w
2Bmeas)a r es h o w ni nF i g .1 5
for TFTR, DIII-D and COMPASS-D data. Agree-ment between theoretically predicted island widthand the magnetic data is excellent. Numerical cal-culations have also conrmed the destabilizing eectof the bootstrap current in realistic geometry [89].
More recently, internal details of the structure of
the neoclassical modes obtained in JET at moder-ate to high values of normalized beta ( 
N=2:4{3.4)
have been directly measured by soft X-ray tomog-raphy [90]. The tomographic reconstruction data(Fig. 16) show that the mode structure varies some-
2274
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 26 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Predicted width per
neoclassical theory (cm) 4
2
0
0.20 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.300.8
0.4
0.068
0.20.6bp
Measured width (cm) 
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8
012345678
1.52.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
bp
bp
1.6(dBq)0.5bp
width(t)
(per ion-polarization or 
cross-island trans. theories)3.0 3.5 4.0012345Island width (cm)
Island width (cm)
Time (s)
Time (s)
Time (s)(a)TFTR 66867
(b) DIII-D 90144(c) COMPASS-D 18432 from magnetics
theory
from ECE
24 MW NBIIsland width (cm)
Figure 15. Measured island widths in various tokamaks compared with neoclassical tearing mode theory
predictions: (a) m;n=4;3 neoclassical tearing mode in TFTR compared with the prediction of the neoclas-
sical island evolution equation from Ref. [76]. (b) m;n=3;2 neoclassical tearing mode in DIII-D compared
with theoretical predictions (calculated using measured parameters) with either the ion polarization current
term included or the cross island transport term included. Time history of p(t) as determined by the equi-
librium reconstruction code EFIT is also shown. (c) m;n=2;1 mode during an ECRH power ramp-down
in COMPASS-D, compared with theoretical predictions (see Ref. [80]). Measured p(t) (from a diamagnetic
loop) is also shown.
what with normalized beta: at N=2:4, ann=2
structure with coupled m=2a n dm= 3 poloidal
harmonics is seen; at N=3:4, them=2h a r -
monic becomes dominant. At higher N3:5, an
m=2 ,n= 1 mode develops that leads either to
a plasma control system eected ‘soft stop’ (plasma
heating and current shutdown) or disruption if shut-down action is not taken.
The onset of neoclassical mode activity and the
resulting limitation on beta depend on the plasmaand mode growth dynamics and also upon thepresence of other MHD activity (sawteeth or ELMs)
with sucient magnitude to generate a nite size
‘seed’ island needed to initiate neoclassical islandgrowth. Figure 17 (adapted from [80]) illustratesthe basis for the seed island sensitivity and thecorresponding metastability of the pre-onset idealMHD stable state. Figure 17 shows that there is anite island width threshold w
critfor mode growth.
For values of pthat exceed a threshold value
p;crit, the neoclassical mode can grow once the
seed island size exceeds wcrit. Once this threshold is
exceeded, the mode grows and eventually saturates
with a width wsatthat increases nearly linearly with
pand, hence, with normalized beta. Furthermore,
once the mode develops, Fig. 17 shows that themode will persist until 
p(N) is reduced to a value
p;crit(N;crit) that is typically much less than the
onset value of p(N).
Figure 18 shows an example in ASDEX-Upgrade
of the typical dynamics of neoclassical mode onset
and the subsequent eect of the saturated mode onenergy connement and achievable beta [81]. Theonset of the mode occurs during a quasi-stationaryphase of the discharge (with constant NBI power and
NN;crit), presumably owing to the occurrence
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2275

--- Page 27 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Figure 16. Soft X-ray tomographic reconstructions of saturated n= 2 neoclassical modes in JET
atN=2:4( l e f t )a n d N=3:4 (right). At the lower N, the mode has both m=2a n dm=3
harmonics; at higher N,t h em= 2 harmonic dominates. The data plots show the perturbation of
the SXR emission at one toroidal azimuth angle: green = small; blue = positive; red = negative.The axisymmetric equilibrium ﬂux surfaces are superimposed.
wsatwcritbp >> bp,crit
00
10 2 468
Island width (arbitrary units)Island growth rate (arbitrary units)-11
bp ~ bp,crit
bp < bp,crit
Figure 17. Neoclassical mode growth rate ( dw=dt )v e r -
sus island width wand poloidal beta p.T h e r ei sa
threshold,p;crit, for mode growth, and, for p>p;crit,
a critical island width, wcrit, for mode growth. For p>
p;crit, the saturated mode width increases linearly with
increasingp. For simplicity, details of the sensitivity
ofwcrittopand to the comparative importance of
the ion polarization and cross island transport eects
(and, hence, plasma collisionality) are omitted here (seeRef. [80]).of a large enough MHD ‘trigger’ event (sawtooth
or ELM). The initial ideal MHD stable plasma ismetastable , waiting for a critical perturbation that
initiates a growing neoclassical island. Once initi-ated, the neoclassical mode growth is relatively slow
(relative to ideal MHD growth rates) and 100 ms
is required for the mode to reach saturation. As themode grows, connement deteriorates and increasedheating power is required to (nearly) recover the pre-onset. When heating power is reduced and then
r e m o v e d ,t h em o d ep e r s i s t su n t i l 
Nfalls toN;crit,
which, in this case, is a small fraction of the onset N.
The ‘ﬂat-top’ Nobtained in the quasi-stationary
phase of the discharge following mode onset is deter-mined in this example by the amount of heatingpower applied and is not necessarily the maximumthat could be obtained if a further increase in heat-ing were possible. In the example shown, the modeonset
Nand the attained saturated mode Nare
nearly equal, albeit with degraded connement (by
25%) after mode onset. Similar onset trigger event
sensitivity, pre-onset metastability and post-onsetmode growth dynamics are seen in all of the toka-maks reporting neoclassical modes. In cases wherethe plasma safety factor is low ( q
953), a 2,1
mode can develop that often leads to disruption.
2276 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 28 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
0510NBI power (MW)
1
-101.52.02.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-30 -20 -10 0AB CElectron temperature (keV)
n = 2 amplitude (a. u.)
0123
Normalized b
Distance at midplane from separatrix (cm)A: 1.45- 1.47 s
B: 1.58- 1.60 s
C: 1.89- 1.91 s A
B
C
To plasma axis3/2 island
Dr ~ 7 cm,
at q ~ 1.5
1.5 1.3 1.9 1.7 2.1 2.3 2.5
Time (s)
Figure 18. Dynamics of neoclassical mode onset and subsequent connement and temperature prole eects in
ASDEX-Upgrade (pulse #8216). An m=3 ,n= 2 neoclassical mode develops at t=1:5 s and persists for the
balance of the beam heated phase of the discharge. Note the drop in Nat xed beam power after mode onset
and lack of recovery of the full pre-onset beta despite a further 30% increase in beam power (both indicating
connement deterioration). Thomson scattering electron temperature prole data conrm the presence of a 3,2island and a 7 cm wide prole ﬂattening at q1:5 when the neoclassical mode is present.
The data above show the dynamic/metastable
nature of the beta limit in long pulse tokamaks andthe importance of distinguishing the 
Nfor mode
onset from the nal Nthat is ultimately attainable
(in present experiments with possible application ofadditional heating power) after mode saturation. Inthis sense, the neoclassical beta limit in future toka-maks is not a single, immediately quantiable value,and, hence, its eect on reactor and ITER perfor-mance must, ultimately, be assessed in terms of themode location and saturated island width and theself-consistent eect of the saturated mode on theplasma pressure prole and connement. These beta
limit matters are discussed below in Section 2.3.3.
Neoclassical mode onset in present experiments
is observed to depend on plasma density and also
on the presence of MHD triggering activity. On
COMPASS-D and DIII-D, the onset of the modesis seen to be dependent on the plasma density (and,hence, on the collisionality). The lower the density,the lower the plasma at which the modes appear.
On COMPASS-D, the measured density scaling oftheat which the mode goes unstable agrees with
that predicted by the ion polarization current model.On DIII-D, the scaling for the onset of neoclassical
modes with collisionality is consistent with either the
ion polarization current model (assuming that thetransition from collisionless to collisional is ‘slow’),or the cross eld transport model (if the paralleltransport is conductive, but not if it is convective).In all cases the onset of the mode is associated withanother MHD perturbation (sawteeth, shbone oscil-lations, ELMs). Indeed, on DIII-D in cases wheresuch perturbations are carefully avoided, and on JETwhere sawteeth spontaneously disappear with heat-
ing, increased stability to neoclassical tearing modes
is observed [12,23].
2.3.2. Island onset thresholds:
mechanisms and data
The physical mechanism that determines the
size of the island threshold width is an impor-tant issue under current examination in the experi-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2277

--- Page 29 ---

ITER Physics Basis
ments in which neoclassical tearing modes have been
observed. Since the critical island threshold deter-
mines the onset of the mode and which modes are
unstable, it is the key to understanding the likelyimpact of neoclassical tearing modes on ITER. Thereis still considerable uncertainty in the theoreticalcalculations (see [91], for example) of the thresholdmechanisms as well as in the experimental data. Adatabase of critical plasma parameters at the point ofonset of neoclassical tearing modes has been assem-bled in order to help determine the physical mecha-
nisms responsible for the neoclassical island thresh-
old [11]. Figure 6 shows two ts of this databasefor mode onset. The ts are based on the thresholdmechanisms espoused in [87] and [88]. Figure 19(a)shows the scaling expected assuming the thresh-old island width is determined by the cross eldtransport model at the critical 
pfor instability.
The data are generally consistent with the expected(

e)0:3scaling that this model implies. The transport
models assumed are described in [78]. Figure 19(b)
shows evidence that supports the polarization cur-
rent model: a generally strong correlation of the onsetof neoclassical tearing modes with the collisionalityparameter, 
i="!
e{ which is predicted to have the
strongest eect in the polarization current model {occurs for 
i="!
e0:3. As is explained in the
caption to Fig. 19, there are certain caveats asso-ciated with the experimental data, and both mod-els in Fig. 19 assume that the seed island amplitude
does not vary strongly with plasma parameters, an
assumption which has only limited experimental jus-tication. The absence of a compelling present basisfor choosing between the two threshold models makesthe scaling of the seed island amplitude for neoclas-sical mode stability an issue that requires furtherexperimental and theoretical study.
2.3.3. Beta limits
If the neoclassical islands grow to sucient size,
they can set the maximum attainable plasma pres-sure. Beta limits set by neoclassical tearing modeshave been observed on COMPASS-D, ASDEX-Upgrade, TFTR, DIII-D and JET. The saturatedisland width and growth time are well predicted byneoclassical theory in all experiments. The size ofthe saturated island, w
sat,o nag i v e nr a t i o n a ls u r -
face with radius rscan be expressed by the simple
formula
wsat
rs=abs−aGGJ
−rs0(3)whereis the local poloidal ,absandaGGJ
are, respectively, the coecients that determine the
magnitude of the bootstrap current term and the
Glasser{Green{Johnson term in the island growthequation, and where

0=d 
dr
+rs−d 
dr
−rs
 (rs)
is the usual resistive tearing mode stability param-
eter that is given by the jump in the logarithmicderivative of the ﬂux,  , across the rational surface.
It has been observed from qscans on COMPASS-
D [80] that the maximum allowable island widthscales with the minimum of either the distance from
the rational surface to the plasma edge (hard or dis-
ruptive onset beta limit), or the distance from therational surface to the q= 1 surface (soft beta limit).
This condition can be stated simply
w
max=m i n [(a−rs);γ(rs−rq=1)] (4)
whereandγare coecients of order 1 that deter-
mine fractional distance allowed before interaction.The combination of Eqns (3) and (4) yields anexpression for the maximum achievable 
on the
rational surface. This, combined with knowledge of
the proles (relating the local poloidal to the global
poloidal), yields an expression for the maximum
achievable plasma pressure.
Additionally, tearing modes can degrade the
energy connement time [92]. A simple model of thedegradation of the energy connement time, knownas the ‘belt model’, has been proposed [93], and is
given by

E
E−4rs
a4wsat
rs: (5)
This model, which is based upon the elementary
premise that energy transport is greatly enhancedover the width of the saturated island (see the tem-perature prole data in Fig. 18), gives estimates
of the connement degradation eect that are in
reasonably good agreement with the correspondingexperimentally measured island radius and width.
2.3.4. Predictions for ITER
Given the uncertainty in the physics behind the
threshold mechanisms, it is dicult to extrapolatecurrently measured island width thresholds for modeonset to ITER with any condence. In general, themeasured threshold island widths seem to scale with
2278
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 30 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
COMPASS-DCOMPASS-DDIII-DDIII-D
TFTRTFTRJET (no mode) JET (no mode)
DIII-D
(no mode)JT-60U
JT-60UASDEX-U ASDEX-U
bN
0
10-210-1 10-3 1011234
1
ni/ew*eJET
JETITERITER
5.2 (n*e)0.30 3 4 2 1bN
0234
1
Figure 19. Comparisons of neoclassical mode onset data from the ITER database with the predictions
of two threshold model scalings. Left: Nat the point of onset of MHD, plotted versus ( 
e)0:3, a proposed
scaling for the onset of MHD from cross island transport threshold model. Right: Nversusi="!,a n
important parameter in determining the critical island width in the ion polarization current threshold model
(large threshold width for i="!>0:3, small threshold width for i="!<0:3). The dashed vertical lines
represent the spread due to a 15% uncertainty in the measured temperature at the rational surface. Thefollowing caveats apply to the interpretation of the database: (1) TFTR data have rapid power increasesand the value of 
i="!goes from above the threshold value to well below in 200 ms; (2) solid data points
for JET and DIII-D are for mode onset, open points are for no mode onset; and (3) The COMPASS-D datais for plasmas with T
e>T i(ECRH heating), while all other data are with neutral beam heating.
the ion poloidal Larmor radius. The predictions of
the threshold island widths for ITER from theo-retical considerations give values in the range of2{7 cm for onset of the 2,1 mode [11]. It is di-
cult to imagine how seed island perturbations with
this width can reliably be avoided by wholly pas-sive means in a machine the size and pulse lengthof ITER. Therefore, it is prudent to assume thatITER will be unstable to at least some neoclassicaltearing modes.
In order to assess the likely impact of these modes
on ITER, it is necessary to estimate the expected sat-urated island width. It is generally observed in exper-iment that the most deleterious mode is the m=2 ,
n= 1 mode, in that it is most likely to lead to dis-
ruption. However, higher mode number islands (e.g.3,2, 4,3 and 5,4), which are observed to reduce con-
nement times by 10{30%, are also problematic and
may not necessarily be tolerable for ITER in termsof the resulting connement deterioration. Assumingthat the 2,1 mode sets the most severe limitation on, and that the mode has been excited by a perturba-
tion large enough to trigger the growth of the mode,and also that the maximum achievable is set when
the island half width becomes comparable to the dis-tance between the rational surface and the plasmaedge (as in [80]), one can then calculate a maximum
for a typical ITER equilibrium. This maximum
achievable normalized (
N;max =maxaB=I)i s
N;max = 2{2.2 [11].
A normalized beta of 2.2 is similar to the value
required, with ‘reference’ connement and impuritycontent assumptions (see Chapter 2), to achieve1.5 GW fusion burn in ITER. The present predic-tions of the beta limit expected in ITER owing tosaturated neoclassical island growth are, therefore,marginally consistent with the achievement of thedesign basis power. But there is little beta limit
‘head room’, and the possible propensity of large
amplitude saturated neoclassical modes to increasethe possibility of disruption is an additional concern(see Section 3.4).
The growth time of the 2,1 mode in ITER is quite
long due to the large plasma cross-section and highplasma temperature. The mode will reach half thesaturated size (0 :5w
sat) in 30 s and 90% of the sat-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2279

--- Page 31 ---

ITER Physics Basis
urated size (0 :9wsat) in 150 s. Because the growth
time is long, it should be technically feasible to
employ a feedback scheme to stabilize neoclassical
tearing, as long as a stabilizing mechanism can befound. Several tokamaks (DIII-D, ASDEX-Upgradeand COMPASS-D) are currently investigating thepossibility of feedback suppression of the 2,1 and/orthe 3,2 mode growth using electron cyclotron currentdrive. The basic principal consideration is to replacethe ‘missing’ bootstrap current inside the island withdriven current, and, thus, remove the island. Local-
ized heating near the rational surface is also pre-
dicted to modify or reverse neoclassical mode growth.
Calculations indicate that an ECRH power on the
order of 30 MW is needed in order to stabilize, or atleast to control, the size of the 2,1 mode on ITER[73,81,94]. The required driven current density mustequal1.5 times the equilibrium bootstrap current.
However, the theoretical calculations done to date
are not self-consistent, and, in any case, it will be
necessary to experimentally verify the feasibility ofsuch a feedback scheme.
Additionally, active control of the qprole, such
asq(0)>1,q(0)>2 or negative central shear could
avoid the dangerous low order neoclassical modes,avoid seed islands (such as those produced by saw-teeth) large enough to trigger mode growth, or, in the
case of negative central shear, turn the destabilizing
bootstrap current term into a stabilizing term. It hasalso been proposed that by controlling sawteeth (seeSection 2.2) to be more frequent and with smallerm;n=1;1 mode amplitude, the coupling to the m=
2 mode might also be made suciently small to avoidtriggering neoclassical modes. So sawtooth control,which may be necessary in ITER to avoid ‘monster’sawteeth (see Section 2.2.6), may also prove to be a
means of avoiding onset of neoclassical modes. Here,
however, the neoclassical mode avoidance require-ments are still clouded by the uncertainties aboutthreshold island width.
2.3.5. Summary
Neoclassical tearing modes pose a potentially seri-
ous challenge to reactor tokamak and ITER high-operation. If neoclassical tearing modes are trig-
gered and uncontrolled in ITER, they will be likely
to limit the attainable normalized to values of

N2. High order MHD modes (e.g. 3,2, 4,3,
5,4) will degrade connement and may, thus, notbe acceptable owing to the deterioration of conne-ment and plasma performance (attainable power)that they will produce. In addition, if the 2,1 neoclas-
sical tearing mode grows to its projected saturated
size, it may cause disruption.
In present tokamaks the onset of neoclassical
modes is associated with the presence of an addi-tional MHD activity perturbation (seed island) thatpushes the mode over a stability threshold. In theabsence of a suciently large seed island trigger, neo-classical modes do not appear and stable long pulse
operation at up to the ideal MHD beta limit is pos-
sible. Both sawteeth and ELMs are observed to actas seed island triggers for neoclassical mode onset inpresent tokamaks. Theoretical considerations put thesize of the threshold seed island width for 2,1 modeonset in ITER in the 2{7 cm range. Given the largesize and long pulse length of ITER, it will proba-bly not be possible to avoid perturbations of thissize, and so the occurrence of neoclassical modes islikely unless robust preventative measures to limit
seed island size from sawteeth and ELMs are taken.
If neoclassical islands are triggered in ITER,
estimates of the saturated island width suggestthat means to limit their growth will be needed.Schemes for feedback control of the growth of neo-classical tearing modes are currently under inves-tigation. Owing to the long growth time of suchmodes in ITER, these schemes should be techni-
cally feasible, but experimental verication of their
ecacy remains as an important future task forpresent experiments. Alternatively, neoclassical tear-ing modes in ITER can perhaps be avoided entirelyin a reverse shear mode of operation or perhaps pre-vented by running with q(0)>1, or by control of
the sawtooth reconnection amplitude. In any case,the provision of sawtooth and MHD island controlmeans in ITER, embodied in the form of suite of
RF heating and current drive schemes with localized
power and current drive capability controllable in the1q3 ﬂux surface domain, seems highly pru-
dent, if not mandatory. It is likely that such MHDcontrol means will also prove useful in the controlof MHD activity associated with error eld inducedlocked modes (Section 2.5) and also, perhaps, resis-tive wall modes (Section 2.4).
2.4. Wall stabilization and
resistive wall modes
Steady state operation of a tokamak reactor and
of ITER is possible if sucient plasma beta val-ues can be reached with a high bootstrap currentfraction. The requirement for a high bootstrap frac-
2280
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 32 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
tionfbs=Ibs=Ip0:9 (motivated in turn by the
relatively limited eciency of non-inductive current
drive, see Chapter 6) combined with the Troyon beta
limit scaling [3] leads to a scaling for the beta limit[95]
[%](0:1=f
bs)(a=R)1=2(N;max )2(1 +2):(6)
This scaling shows that at high fbsand typical
inverse aspect ratios, operation at or above theTroyon beta limit ( 
N3:5) and strong shaping
(1:6) of the plasma cross-section are needed to
reach reactor relevant betas. The estimate of the beta
limit embodied in Eq. (6) is well conrmed by numer-ical MHD stability studies (see Section 2.1). Forexample, with a full sized ITER plasma ( a=2:8m ,
R=8:14,B=5:7 T), Eq. (6) yields a beta limit of
about 3%, a value that is at best (depending on theplasma proles and impurity content assumptions)marginally consistent with 1.5 GW fusion power. Thecorresponding plasma current requirement is 19 MA,and, hence, about 2 MA of non-inductive current
drive, somewhat beyond projected ITER capabili-
ties with 100 MW of power at the plasma densi-ties required, would be needed. These estimates showboth the diculties of achieving steady state reactoroperation and the importance of operation at highbootstrap fractions and normalized betas at or abovethe Troyon limit.
The Troyon limit assumes ‘[conducting] wall at
innity’ boundary conditions (see Section 2.1), and
more favourable limits result if there is a perfectlyconducting wall close to the plasma. Kessel et al.
[96] studied the stability of reversed shear equilib-ria (see Section 2.7). Under the assumption of aperfectly conducting wall located at 1.3 times theminor radius, they found stable reversed shear equi-libria with a 
(fusion reactivity weighted) limit of
over 5%, 92% bootstrap fraction, and good alignment
(correspondence of radial prole) between the boot-
strap and equilibrium currents. In these equilibria,the beta limit is mainly set by low- nexternal kink
modes, in particular n= 1 modes, and, hence, wall
stabilization is needed.
The elementary analysis presented above and
detailed numerical MHD stability modelling ofsteady state relevant plasmas show that wall stabi-
lization (and possibly active feedback stabilization,
see Section 2.4.4 below) appear to be necessary forthe success of a steady state tokamak reactor andfor the achievement of 1{1.5 GW power in steadystate modes in ITER. However, the physics of wallstabilization is not trivial, and, until rather recently,it was not thought to be eective on a long time-
scale. Recent experimental and theoretical results
have shown that partial wall stabilization occurs
when the plasma is rotating. However, it is not yetclear whether the stabilization by resistive walls andplasma rotation is suciently strong and reliable tobe used in a reactor and in ITER. In what follows, wepresent some of the basic theoretical developmentsand experimental results and point at issues yet tobe resolved.
2.4.1. Theoretical considerations and
the role of rotation
It is well known that for static plasmas, resistive
walls cannot stabilize equilibria that are unstablewithout a wall [97]. A resistive wall merely slowsthe growth of the instability to the resistive time-scale of the wall ( 
wall=L=R). The growing mode
that slowly penetrates the wall is called a resistive
wall mode (RWM). When plasma rotation is intro-duced, two types of modes occur. Some modes rotatewith the plasma, and these will be referred to as theplasma modes. If the mode rotation is fast comparedwith the wall time ( !
rotwall1), the magnetic
perturbation of such a mode does not have time topenetrate the wall. The wall appears as an ideal con-ductor, and the plasma modes are wall stabilized.
However, a RWM that rotates slowly with respect to
the wall (!
rotwall=O(1)) continues to exist. The
magnetic eld perturbation of the RWM partly pen-etrates the wall, and the mode stability involves thedynamics both in the plasma and at the wall. Thedynamics inside the plasma is complicated by thefact that the mode rotates relative to the plasma.
Theoretical calculations for resistive instabilities
in low-cylindrical plasmas, taking into account
both the dynamics in the plasma and at the resis-tive wall, were made in the 1980s [98{100]. Thesecalculations show that if the rotation speed is su-ciently high, resistive tearing modes can be stabilizedby a wall that is not too far away from the plasma.The necessary rotation speed is the sum of two con-tributions: one is the rotation of the mode relativeto the plasma, which scales as a resistive tearing
growth rate; the other is the rotation of the mode
with respect to the wall, which scales inversely to thewall time [99,100]. For idealinstabilities (e.g. exter-
nal kinks), Zakharov and Putvinskii [101] showedthat rotation does not stabilize the RWM if thereis no resonant surface inside the plasma.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2281

--- Page 33 ---

ITER Physics Basis
2.4.2. Stabilization of external kink modes
Experiments on DIII-D [102{105] and PBX-M
[106, 107] showed, however, that plasmas couldremain stable for periods of 100 ms with pres-
sures well above the Troyon limit. The stability ofthese discharges was hard to explain without invok-ing wall stabilization, which was typically observedto persist for durations that exceeded the wall resis-tive time-scale. Figure 20 shows representative datafrom a DIII-D discharge that exceeds the Troyon
limit for 100 ms, or about 20 wall time constants
[103]. The data show the presence of a non-rotating(stationary in the wall frame) RWM in the aboveTroyon limit phase of the discharge. The RWMis stabilized in a quasi-steady state manner (rel-ative to the 5 ms RWM growth time) so long
as the rotation frequency of the q=3s u r f a c e
is greater than the RWM growth rate. When theq= 3 rotation drops below this threshold, the
RWM grows rapidly and the high beta phase of
the discharge terminates. The interpretation madein [103] is that the high- phase of the discharge
is sustained owing to rotation induced stabilizationof the RWM. More recent studies of low induc-tance wall stabilized plasmas with weak negativecentral magnetic shear (produced by current ramp-ing, see Section 2.7) in DIII-D have extended thewall stabilization duration to 200 ms with enhance-ment factors 
N=N;no −wallof up to 1.4 [104]. A
rotation rate threshold for wall stabilization that
is consistent with theoretical expectations has alsobeen observed. ‘Encouraging results’ of preliminary‘open loop’ tests of a feedback scheme in whichexternal coils are used to make the resistive wallappear to be ideally conductive (and, thus, extendthe stabilization period) are also reported (see Sec-tion 2.4.4).
Bondeson and Ward [108, 109] showed, numeri-
cally, that pressure driven ideal external kink modescan be stabilized by relatively modest plasma rota-tion (!
rot=!A0:03{0.1) together with resistive
walls, and that signicant increases of the betalimit are possible. These calculations showed howthe stability of the rotating plasma modes andthe wall locked RWM is aected by the plasma{
wall separation. The basic situation is illustrated in
Fig. 21, which shows the normalized growth ratesfor the plasma mode (external n= 1 kink) and the
RWM, both as a function of normalized wall position(r
W=a). The pressure in the example shown is about
30% above the ideal MHD ‘wall at innity’ limit01020
Time (ms)550 600 650 700 750dBr (G)
m/n = 3/1q = 2
q = 2.5
q = 3CER
MirnovToroidal rotation 
frequency (kHz)
bNlimit (no wall)
PNB (MW)
024051015
02550
Figure 20. DIII-D discharge #80111 illustrating plasma
rotation stabilization of a non-rotating m=3 ,n=1
RWM (detected by saddle loop magnetics data, second
panel). The RWM develops for N> N;ideal , but is
resistively stabilized (limited in amplitude) by the eectof plasma rotation at the q=3s u r f a c e .A st h e q=3r o t a -
tion slows, the mode grows in a corresponding manner.When theq= 3 rotation ceases, the wall stabilization
ceases to be eective, the RWM grows rapidly on a wallresistance time-scale ( 5 ms) and the high- 
Nphase ter-
minates owing to severe connement deterioration. Datareproduced from Ref. [103].
and the normalized rotation rate is !rot=!A=0:06.
As expected, the plasma mode is unstable, with anideal MHD growth rate when the wall is locatedoutside the marginal ideal MHD stability wall posi-tion (r
W=a1:7). The RWM is unstable for a
close tting wall, but becomes stable as the wallis moved away from the plasma. For the exampleshown,r
W=a1:4 is required for RWM stability.
This requirement agrees with simple 0calculations.
For the case shown in Fig. 21, there is a window
for the wall position 1 :4rW=a1:7w h e r eb o t h
the plasma and the RWM are stable. Figure 22 showshow the marginal wall positions for the plasma modeand the RWM depend on the normalized beta fora JET shaped equilibrium studied in [108]. With
2282
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 34 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
1.0 1.5 2.0Plasma mode
    growth rateRWM slip frequency:
    tWDwres
RWM growth rate:t
Wgres
Wall position (r W/a)tAgideal24
-2
-4
-60 0.00.1
-0.1
-0.20.26
Figure 21. R e s i s t i v ew a l lm o d eg r o w t hr a t ea n ds l i p
frequency and plasma mode (ideal n=1e x t e r n a lk i n k )
growth rate versus resistive wall position, for a plasmawith pressure 30% above the wall at innity external kinkbeta limit and !
rot=!A=0:06. A nite width wall posi-
tion window (shaded domain) for simultaneous plasma
and RWM stability exists.
increasing beta, the stability window for the wall
position narrows and eventually closes. Of course,stability is required for modes with all values of thetoroidal mode number n, and the stabilizing eect of
the wall decreases with increasing n. For the reversed
shear equilibria considered for steady state toka-maks,n= 1 tends to be the most limiting mode and,
therefore, wall stabilization can signicantly raise thebeta limit of such equilibria.
From Fig. 22, it can be seen that the optimal
position of the wall is about 1.3 times the minorradius. This is a typical wall position in presentday tokamaks and is also the approximate positionof the toroidally conducting nuclear shield module‘backplate’ support structure in ITER. Modica-
tions due to incomplete walls have been discussed
by Ward [110].
Several analytical calculations of wall stabi-
lization have been given in cylindrical geometry.These emphasize the importance of ‘dissipation’ for
the stabilization. Such dissipation may come from
resonant absorption (which occurs close to the moderational surfaces), viscosity and resistivity. Thenumerical calculations [108,109] included dissipationfrom the resonant absorption as well as from aparallel viscosity that models ion Landau damping3.6 3.2 4.0 4.41.01.52.0Wall position for marginal stability (r W/a)
Normalized beta ( bN) n = 1
n = 1n = 2
n = 2Plasma mode
RWMJET shape, q a = 2.55
po/Æpæ = 1.7, wrot/wA = 0.06
Plasma mode 
and RWM stability
Figure 22. Marginal wall position versus normalized
beta for plasma and RWMs. The plasma mode is stablefor a wall located inside the marginal position, and theRWM is stable for a wall located outside the marginalposition. A nite wall position stability window (shadedregion) exists in this case for 
N4:2. The calculation
here is for a relatively broad pressure prole with a cen-tral to volume average pressure ratio equal to 1.7
and is eective mainly by coupling to the toroidal
sidebands. In a toroidal plasma, there are typicallymany mode resonant surfaces q=m=n,n e a rw h i c h
the slow plasma rotation frequency resonates with
a continuum frequency. Betti and Freidberg [111]treat the damping from the sound wave resonancein MHD and show that this dissipation mechanismgives rise to a window of stability for the wallposition. Numerical and analytical work [112, 113]shows that viscous and resistive dissipation canalso give rise to wall stabilization. Fitzpatrickand Aydemir [113] analysed the eects of toroidal
coupling of the Alfv enic resonances.
2.4.3. Threshold for the rotation speed
The numerical calculations presented in [108,109]
showed that the stability of the RWM is sensitive tothe assumptions regarding the ion Landau damping.Typically, these calculations gave 30{40% increasesin the beta limit with rotation speeds of the order
of several per cent of the Alfv en speed (or about
20% of the sound speed at the q= 2 rational sur-
face). This is in agreement with experimental resultsfrom DIII-D [103,105] and PBX-M [107]. However,the experimental threshold rotation speed for wallstabilization appears to be lower than the predic-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2283

--- Page 35 ---

ITER Physics Basis
tions given in [108, 109]. In DIII-D, wall stabiliza-
tion is observed at rotation frequencies below 1% of
the Alfv en speed, whereas MHD calculations suggest
that several per cent of the Alfv en speed are needed
for a signicant eect. It is important to resolve thisissue since rotation speeds in ITER are not expectedto exceed 0.5% of the Alfv en speed. A number of pos-
sible resolutions to this diculty have been proposedas detailed below.
(i)Ion Landau damping
One possible resolution may come from considera-
tion of the eect of strong ion Landau damping. Chuet al. [105] generalized the rst toroidal calculations
to include sheared ﬂow. These calculations applied acylindrical model for the ion Landau damping andreproduced the rather low critical rotation veloci-ties observed in DIII-D. It was subsequently pointedout [114,115] that the cylindrical results for ion Lan-
dau damping typically do not apply to the prob-
lem of RWM stability. In toroidal geometry, particletrapping strongly reduces the Landau damping if themode frequency is below ( r=R)
1=2vthi=qR.F o rr o t a -
tion frequencies substantially below ( r=R)1=2vthi=qR
(as is usually the case for the wall stabilized dis-charges), the ion Landau damping becomes negli-gible. Therefore, the ion Landau damping on thetoroidal sidebands is not important in the core of theplasma. One possible explanation of the low experi-
mental rotation thresholds is that ion Landau damp-
ing is signicant near the edge of the plasma wherev
thi=qRbecomes small. Another possibility [115] is
that because of a signicant Prsch{Schl¨ uter like
enhancement of inertia near the edge, the rotationfrequency could become large in comparison with thelocal Alfv en continuum frequency.
(ii) Incomplete poloidal walls
Consideration of the eect of the poloidal incom-
pleteness of the stabilizing wall also appears tobe important. Ward [110] analysed the stabiliza-tion resulting from a partial poloidal wall using theNOVA-W code. For high- equilibria, the wall stabi-
lization from segments on the outboard side is muchstronger than that from inboard wall segments. Adiminished poloidal extent of the wall can largely be
compensated for by moving the wall closer to the
plasma. The NOVA-W calculations showed that forah i g h -equilibrium, a small conducting segment on
the outboard side, close to the plasma surface, cangive complete stability at considerably lower rotationvelocities than a complete wall. However, even takingthe eect of a partial poloidal wall into account, it
seems dicult to explain the stabilization at the low
rotation speeds observed in DIII-D. An important
point [110] concerning the possibility of wall stabi-lization in ITER is that if a conducting wall has tobe placed closer to the plasma than the optimumposition for a complete wall, it is advantageous forRWM stability to introduce isolating slits in the wall.These slits must, of course, be designed so as not todestroy vertical ( n= 0) stability.
(iii) Linear stabilization at resistive rotation
frequencies
In a cylindrical stability analysis [116], Finn found
a parameter region where a plasma that is ideallyunstable with the wall at innity could be completelystabilized by rotation speeds comparable to resistivegrowth rates. It was later shown [117] that, althoughstabilization of cylindrical zero-pressure equilibria atsuch low rotation speeds is possible in principle, thestabilization requires extremely careful positioning of
the wall and appears not to be experimentally rele-
vant.
Beyond these uncertainties about the basic wall
stabilization processes, it is also not straightfor-
ward to translate these cylindrical stability mod-
elling results into predictions for tokamaks. Fullytoroidal calculations with the resistive MARS code[108,109] showed very little inﬂuence of nite resistiv-ity on the linear stability of the RWM. No region wasfound where an ideal instability could be wall stabi-lized by a rotation frequency of the order of resis-tive growth rates. This is quite natural, because theresistive modes are strongly stabilized by favourableaverage curvature in MHD and should be irrelevant
to RWM stability. Neoclassical eects on RWM sta-
bility have not yet been examined. Furthermore, thedriving of an external kink mode by pressure in atokamak depends on toroidal coupling and is fun-damentally dierent from the driving of a resonantmode in a cylinder. This makes it dicult to carryover cylindrical results to tokamaks.
2.4.4. Active (feedback) stabilization of RWMs
Obtaining sucient plasma rotation to robustly
stabilize RWMs in reactor tokamaks { even those
with continuous NBI { and in ITER appears tobe problematic. However, the requirement to haveenough plasma rotation to stabilize RWMs can, inprinciple, be overcome by employing feedback con-trolled external coils to make the resistive wall act
2284
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 36 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
as if it is an ideal conductor [118]. The basic con-
cept is to use sensors located on the shell to control
external coils that counteract the resistive diusion
of the RWM ﬂux through the shell and sensors. Theconcept is analogous to the well known use of activefeedback to external PF coils to stabilize the n=0
resistive vertical instability of an elongated plasma inthe presence of a resistive wall. Of course, to stabilizekink and/or RW modes, the feedback scheme must becapable of acting upon the specic non-axisymmetricMHD mode(s) in question, and so proposed concepts
for kink and RWM have focused on a modular ‘intelli-
gent (or smart) shell’ system comprised of a numberof independent sensors that are appropriately con-nected to a multi-mode feedback system [119,120].These modular systems can { subject to certain lim-itations imposed by the sensor and coil conguration{ autonomously detect and stabilize any combina-tion of modes. Figure 23 shows a schematic of onepossible implementation scheme, in which an arrayof conductors surrounding the plasma surface com-
prise a virtual shell with multi-mode response that
can, in principle, be controlled by an analogous arrayof sensors located in the same radial position. Morereactor relevant variants of the scheme in which theactive conductors are located outboard of the sensorarray are also possible. However, more or less com-plete coverage of the torus by conductors appears tobe required. This requirement for complete coverageraises signicant access and conductor force support
challenges in implementing such schemes in a reactor
tokamak.
Studies of the performance and sensor and feed-
back coil position requirements of such schemes sug-gest that they could be implemented (in terms of thesensor and feedback coil locations and current carry-ing capability and active power) in a reactor [121].Studies of the possibility of a ‘smart shell’ have also
shown that the RWM can be stabilized by the alter-
nate artice of driving the feedback coils to emulatea ‘fake’ rotating resistive shell located at the sensorposition. The fake rotating shell is found to requirelower feedback gain.
Attempts to verify the feasibility of active feed-
back to aect and ultimately stabilize RWMs arepresently in progress in several tokamak experiments.
The results reported in [104] show initial indications
of the ability of actively driven external coils to aectRWMs. However, denitive demonstration of RWMstabilization and comparison of the merits of ‘smart’versus ‘fake’ shell concepts awaits future experi-ments. In addition, the details of how the requiredSi,jSi,j+1Si+1,j+1
Pi,jPi,j+1
PlasmaSensor Array  Si,j (flux loops)Feedback Array P i,j
(actively driven coils)
etc.
etc.
Figure 23. Possible implementation of an ‘intelligent
shell’ scheme for feedback stabilization of RWMs. Thesystem comprises a sensor array S
ijelectronically cou-
pled to a corresponding actively driven feedback coilarrayP
ij. With sucient feedback amplier gain and
bandwidth, the sensor array surface appears to be a resis-tanceless conductor, and the relevant RWM(s) are stabi-
lized.
feedback could actually be implemented in a reac-
tor or in ITER remain to be investigated. While thetechnical (current/voltage) requirements for imple-
mentation in ITER or in a reactor are, in principle,
achievable, the engineering details of how the sensors,coils and electrical connections can be incorporated(and maintained) in ITER or in a reactor remain tobe evaluated.
2.4.5. Summary
Experiments with rotating plasmas and resistive
walls show the possibility of stable plasma operation
at beta limits well above the wall at innity limit.
Increases of the beta limits by 30{50% are observedand wall stabilized discharges could potentially beused for a steady state tokamak reactor or for ITER.Theory based on toroidal MHD stability can gen-erally explain the observed increases in the betalimit, although the predictions for the rotation speedrequired tend to be higher than the speed observedto be sucient in experiments for stabilization. Sev-
eral explanations for this discrepancy between theory
and experiment have been suggested, but resolutionof the discrepancy still remains open. Furthermore,most examples of wall stabilization at low rotationspeeds have only lasted for relatively short times,and, hence, there is concern that these plasmas may
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2285

--- Page 37 ---

ITER Physics Basis
still have been unstable to slowly growing RWMs.
One eect that needs to be better understood is
the inﬂuence of diamagnetic drifts, which are often
comparable to the rotation speeds. This issue andthe more general concern that the projected rota-tion velocities for ITER and reactor plasmas tendto fall below even the lower than theory experimen-tal rotation velocity thresholds remain unresolved.In this regard, the potential for active feedback sta-bilization of RWMs without rotation via ‘smart’ or‘fake’ wall schemes also needs to be assessed, as does
the engineering feasibility of actually being able to
implement such schemes in an ITER/reactor design.
2.5. Non-axisymmetric error elds
a n dl o c k e dm o d e s
Small deviations of tokamak magnetic elds from
ideal axisymmetry (hereafter: non-axisymmetricerror elds or simply error elds) with amplitudes
B
r=BT10−4
can induce low- m,l o w -nlocked (i.e. non-rotating)
MHD modes in the plasma. The induced modesthemselves are resistive tearing modes, and thephysics of mode growth, slowing and locking are gov-erned by resistive MHD. The basic physics mech-
anism that is responsible for mode locking is the
toroidal rotation braking (dissipation) eect of errorelds in slowing and ultimately stopping the rota-tion ofm=nMHD modes at the q=m=nratio-
nal surface. Once such a locked mode develops, themode amplitude grows and the resulting high ampli-tude saturated mode can degrade connement qual-ity or result in subsequent or immediate disruption.Saturated locked modes that develop in the early(start-up) phase of the discharge can persist and
cause subsequent disruption when later changes to
the plasma state (heating, proximity to the betalimit, current ramp-down, etc.) are introduced. Ineither case, locked modes can constitute a signicantlimitation on the operational parameters achievablein present tokamaks, especially at low plasma densi-t i e sa n da th i g hb e t a .
Since the susceptibility of tokamaks to error eld
induced mode locking is projected to increase with
size (major radius) and possibly with toroidal eld
(see below), large reactor tokamaks are expected tobe somewhat more sensitive than present tokamaksto mode locking and small relative levels of errorelds. The tolerable levels for error elds and plasmaoperation strategies for avoiding locked modes are,therefore, important issues for ITER and future reac-
tor tokamaks. Recent systematic studies of the sen-
sitivity of present tokamaks to the magnitude and
harmonic content ( m=n spectrum) of error elds
and theoretical assessments of the rotation brakingeects of error elds have led to a semi-empiricalunderstanding, albeit with some outstanding uncer-tainties, of the error eld correction and controlrequirements for ITER. There are also theories (seebelow) that can explain many of the error eld mag-nitude and plasma parameter sensitivities seen in
present experiments. On either basis, it appears for
ITER that both careful construction and alignmentof the toroidal and PF coils before plasma opera-tion and provision of controllable error eld correc-tion during plasma operation will be needed to avoidlocked mode diculties during the low density start-up phase of the plasma operation scenario (see Chap-ter 8), and probably also during the high- burn
phase.
2.5.1. Physics mechanisms and types
of locked modes
Locked modes arise from two distinct sources.
The rst source is the braking of the rotation ofinherent MHD instabilities (typically resistive tear-ing modes) due to the presence of the nearby con-ducting structures (torus vacuum vessels, n=0s t a -
bilizing structures, etc.) that surround the plasma.Most tokamak MHD instabilities rotate toroidally
owing to diamagnetic eects, NBI momentum input,
etc., and as these rotating modes grow to large ampli-tude, they drive increasingly large eddy currentsin the surrounding conducting structures. Theseeddy currents in turn exert a torque on the plasmathat causes the rotation of the driving MHD insta-bility to slow [122]. The braking torque increaseswith the square of the instability amplitude, so, atsuciently large amplitude, instabilities can come
almost to rest, at which point interactions with
small static external error elds (from toroidal andpoloidal coil asymmetries, see below) completelystop, or lock, the modes [123]. For reasons dis-cussed in [124], this type of resistive tearing modelocking tends to occur preferentially in larger toka-maks such as JET [125] and DIII-D [78]. In manyinstances, locking occurs with a well dened toroidalphase, showing the ultimate role of external errorelds.
Figure 24 shows a model calculation that illus-
trates representative aspects of resistive tearing
2286
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 38 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
mode growth, slowing and locking in JET. The
model reproduces the features seen in the exper-
imental data. The slow decrease in mode rota-
tion frequency followed by sudden disappearanceof the usual Mirnov oscillation signal is the typ-ical experimental signature of mode locking. Notethat although the amplitude of the Mirnov sig-nal (derived from AC magnetic measurements ofdB
pol=dt)) decreases as the mode locks, the actual
mode amplitude (experimentally detectable by DCnon-axisymmetric radial eld or ﬂux dierence mea-
surements, see, for example, [125]) continues to grow
until locking ( != 0) occurs. At this point, further
mode growth (not explicitly shown in Fig. 24) oftenoccurs.
The utility of static (dc) ﬂux or eld dierence
measurements in unambiguously detecting the pres-ence of locked modes has made such diagnosticsessential additions to the suite of ‘plasma operationstatus’ diagnostics implemented on presently oper-ating tokamaks (see Chapters 7 and 8). Althoughoccurrence of a locked mode is not always immedi-ately detrimental to subsequent plasma operation,
locked modes are usually plasma operation features
to be avoided, and detection of a locked mode canbe used as an indicator of possible or impending dis-ruption (see Section 4.6).
The slowing down and locking of tearing modes
occurs on a slow (resistive MHD) time-scale;100 ms in present tokamaks. Mode locking is also
observed to occur on a much faster time-scale dur-ing the growth of disruption MHD precursors (seeSection 4.1), which are typically 1,1 and 2,1 internalkink modes. Here, mode growth, slowing and lock-ing with characteristics very similar to tearing mode
locking occurs on a 1 ms time-scale. External error
eld eects and sensitivities are usually not notice-able or immediately relevant to this manifestation ofmode locking. But mode locking is clearly an impor-tant aspect of the nal phase of disruption precursordevelopment.
Resistive tearing mode locking that does not cause
immediate disruption can sometimes be reversed,either by decrease of externally applied error elds(see below) or by the addition or increase of neu-tral beam injection (NBI) momentum input. There
is appreciable hysteresis before the mode unlocks,
so when the mode nally breaks free, the rotationrate increases rapidly and the resulting event, termedmode spin up , produces a characteristic Mirnov oscil-
lation burst of increasing frequency (see Fig. 2 in[126]).Island width (w/a)
Mirnov signal (dB/dt)~
0
02
100.1
Frequency ( w) (103 s-1)
0.0 0.05 0.10 0.15(a.u.)
Time (s)
Figure 24. Calculation based on a model described in
[122] of a 2,1 resistive tearing mode slowing and locking ina JET ohmic plasma. An initial plasma rotation velocity
!= 2000 s
−1is assumed in this example.
The second type of locked mode is directly driven
by non-axisymmetric error elds. These error eldsinevitably arise in any tokamak from sources suchas coil positioning errors, irregularities in the coilshapes, current feeds to the coils, inter-turn connec-tions within the coils, eddy currents, and nearby fer-romagnetic materials. ‘Resonant’ error eld harmon-
ics (m,n) that match major plasma MHD instability
modes have the greatest eect. Experimentally, theresonant (2,1) ( m=2 ,n= 1) error eld component
has been observed to act as the seed to induce dom-inantly (2,1) locked modes in a range of tokamaks[126{130]. This error eld locking is understood to
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2287

--- Page 39 ---

ITER Physics Basis
occur when the torque that the error eld exerts on
the plasma in the vicinity of q= 2 is sucient to slow
and stop the plasma rotation, overcoming the plasma
inertial and viscous torques [131]. Error eld lockedmodes are important because, once formed, they cangrow to a large amplitude (for reasons that are notfully understood) and either seriously degrade theconnement quality or cause disruption.
The error eld locked modes are distinguished
from natural locked modes in that they can arise in
MHD stable plasmas and have no rotating precur-sor phase. Natural locked modes are simply causedby the instability becoming large, which can oftenlead to disruption, but the locking generally is of lit-tle direct relevance in itself. Error eld locked modesare more important so far as their operational eectsare concerned, and, thus, the remainder of this Sec-tion concentrates on their characteristics in presentday tokamaks and their extrapolation to ITER.
2.5.2. Theory background
Experiments on error eld locked modes in ohmic
plasmas have been conducted on a number oftokamaks { most notably COMPASS-C (and morerecently COMPASS-D) [126], DIII-D [127] and JET[128] { and recently there has been a substantialexperimental eort to rene understanding of theerror eld sensitivities in these machines [132]. These
recent experiments use saddle coils external to the
plasma to apply known helical ‘error elds’ (reso-nant magnetic perturbations, or RMPs) and showthat the threshold error eld for a locked mode tobe induced decreases with decreasing plasma den-sity. Thus, error eld locked modes are expectedto be most problematic in ITER during the rela-tively low density phase required for plasma cur-rent ramp-up and H-mode access. Figure 25 illus-trates the density sensitivities for ohmic plasma
mode locking and after mode locking ‘stimulated’
disruption seen for an externally applied 2,1 RMPin COMPASS-C [126]. There is an approximatelylinear correlation between density and applied erroreld for locked mode onset (penetration). Furtherincrease in error eld (or decrease in density) resultsin disruption.
A theoretical understanding of the processes
involved in the formation of error eld locked modeshas been developed, and application of this the-ory allows the various observations noted above tobe understood [126,131,133]. The basic mechanismresponsible for the threshold for mode locking isNo penetration
Penetration
Disruption
RMP Coil Current (kA)Penetration Threshold Model:
tvis = 26 ms tvis = 12 ms
001234
12ne (1019 m-3)–
Figure 25. Plasma response to externally applied 2,1
RMP in COMPASS-C (see Ref. [126]). A 1 kA coil cur-rent produces a 13 G radial 2,1 eld at the plasma sur-face. The toroidal eld is 1.1 T in these experiments. The
mode penetration threshold density is well described by
a theoretical model (detailed in Ref. [126]) that includesthe eect of strong poloidal ﬂow damping. The viscos-ity time-scale 
v(see discussion in text) is a parameter
in the model: the model curves shown are for the experi-mentally measured range of 
v. A model without poloidal
damping fails to describe the data.
straightforward: a resonant error eld applies a slow-
ing torque to the plasma in the vicinity of the ratio-nal surface, but, until a critical perturbation thresh-old is reached, the plasma eectively shields theapplied perturbation and very little internal tear-ing reconnection (plasma mode growth) occurs. How-ever, when the applied perturbation is large enoughto slow the plasma to about half its initial rotation
frequency ( !
0=2), there is an abrupt transition to
a locked mode with signicant internal tearing: thisprocess is commonly termed mode penetration .T h e
previously mentioned appearance of a static (non-rotating)m=nradial eld component or ﬂux imbal-
ance provides the most immediate indication of pene-tration, but there are usually also other indications ofpenetration { including directly measurable changesin plasma rotation velocity { seen on a wide range of
other plasma core viewing diagnostics (see, for exam-
ple, Fig. 2 in [126]).
Calculation of the plasma torque balance shows
the error eld ( B
rmn) to achieve mode penetration
is [133]
Brmn
BT/!0Arec
v1=2
(7)
whereA,vandrecare the Alfv en, viscous and
2288 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 40 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
magnetic reconnection times, respectively. Interpre-
tation of this mode penetration formula requires
determination of the reconnection and viscous times.
For standard models, the reconnection time is gov-erned by the plasma resistivity, which, in turn, canbe determined by using an assumed connementscaling. The viscous time can also be determinedby use of empirical observations, obtained in auxil-iary heated tokamaks, that momentum connementtime-scales in proportion to the energy connementtime (this scaling is assumed, but not proven, to be
valid in ohmically heated devices) or by the alternate
method of observing the ‘spin up’ rate of a lockedmode after an externally applied RMP is removed[126].
2.5.3. Experimental observations
To determine experimentally the likely error eld
locked mode thresholds in ITER, and, thus, therequirements for error eld correction, there are twobasic issues that must be studied in present experi-ments:
(a) how the threshold depends on the harmonic
spectrum (m;n) of the error eld; and
(b) the scaling of the threshold with global
machine and plasma parameters, e.g. q
95,BT,
ne,R,,e t c .
2.5.3.1. Harmonic spectrum
The issue of the harmonic spectrum requires con-
sideration of the eect of the m;nspectrum of error
eld modes that is present in any real tokamak.The torque applied directly by the error eld, in theabsence of a natural mode, at a given resonant sur-face (r
j) is [135]
T(rj)=X
mImCj
m2
: (8)
Here,Imare complex numbers arising from the
Fourier coecients of the error eld current, whichare decomposed into toroidal ring functions [135].
TheC
j
mare real numbers representing the toroidal
coupling of the component resonant at rjto the error
eld currents. This is the direct torque at rj.T h e r e
are also torques applied at neighbouring resonantsurfaces, which act by viscous coupling to apply atorque atr
j, this means that the total torque at rjhas the form
Ttot(rj)=T(rj)+X
k6=jAj
kT(rk): (9)
Experiments have been performed on COMPASS-D
and DIII-D to investigate the form of this torque. OnCOMPASS-D, the mixture of Fourier harmonics maybe varied by using dierent combinations of RMPcoils external to the plasma. In particular, indepen-dently powered coil combinations with two dierentdominant ( m;n) combinations are used. Figure 26
shows typical data for how the coil current thresh-
olds for penetration vary as the current ( I
2;1)i nt h e
RMP coil set that produces mainly a 2,1 error eld isvaried against the current ( I
3;1) in the coil set that
produces mainly a 3,1 error eld. The studies areconducted with single null plasmas with an ITERlike elongation and shape.
0
-2-3 -1 0 1231
-13
2
4
I3,1(kA)I2,1(kA)PenetrationPenetration(I3,1,I2,1)pen
No penetration
Figure 26. Error eld coil currents for 2,1 mode
penetration and locking in low density ohmic plasmas(210
19m−3) in COMPASS-D. Mode locking occurs
whenever the magnitudes of the currents in the 3,1 and
2,1 coils exceed the boundary indicated by the demarca-tion between the unshaded and shaded domains. Thesedomains and the boundary presumably extend as shownin an anti-symmetrical fashion for negative I
2;1.
Currents of kA in the 2,1 coil alone or currents
of2 kA in the 3,1 coil alone are sucient to
produce mode locking. There is strong interactionbetween the (2,1) and (3,1) combinations, but thelocked mode formed always remains a dominantly(2,1) mode. Similar results are obtained from the
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2289

--- Page 41 ---

ITER Physics Basis
interaction of dominantly (1,1) and (2,1) combina-
tions. The Fourier components of the error eld cur-
rent have been evaluated and a general form for the
torque tted to the data (see Eq. (9)); the result is
Ttot(q=2 )/B2
pen
0:13jB1;1j2+j(0:21 + 0:02i)B1;1
+B2;1+( 0:85−0:17i)B3;1j2+1:69jB3;1j2
(10)
where the Fourier analysis is performed in straight
eld line coordinates at q=2a n dt h er e s u l t s
obtained are represented in polar form. The inter-pretation of Eq. (10) is that the principal mode lock-ing eects are the torque that the (2,1) and (3,1)modes apply at the q= 2 surface and the viscous
drag from the torque applied at q=3(jB
3;1j2term).
The weighted sum interaction between 2,1 and 3,1
modes gives rise to the elliptical mode penetrationboundary manifested in Fig. 26. The (1,1) viscousdrag torque and the torque that the 1,1 mode con-tributes at q= 2 have a smaller eect that results
in the same type of (1,1), (2,1) mode interactionbehaviour as shown in Fig. 26. The quantity B
pen
([Ttot(q=2 ) ]0:5) can be interpreted as giving the
equivalent mode locking threshold for a pure (2,1)
eld.
The COMPASS-D data is straightforward to
interpret owing to the availability of independentlycontrollable RMP excitation and the fact that theapplied error elds needed to produce mode locking
are much larger than inherent residual error elds.
Similar error eld mode sensitivity experiments havebeen performed on DIII-D in double null plasmas byramping down the density until an error eld inducedlocked mode forms. Here, the harmonic mix wasaltered by varying the mix of natural (coil construc-tion/alignment) error eld and the error elds addedby the so-called ‘ n= 1 coil’ and ‘C coil’ error eld
perturbation coil systems [136]. The toroidal eld B
t
and safety factor q95were also separately varied to
elucidate the respective dependences of the density
threshold on these parameters. Empirical analysis inwhich the error eld amplitude and harmonic con-tent is treated in a manner that includes the eectof both viscous and direct coupling, as in COMPASS-D, yields a scaling for the density threshold that isgiven by
n
e(1019m−3)=0:6(Bt=2:1T )0:040:29
(q95=3:3)0:80:58Bpen(G)
(11 a)where (atq95=3:3)
B2
pen=0:28B2
r1;1+( 0:25Br1;1+Br2;1
−0:05Br3;1)2+0:51B2
r3;1:
(11b)
The equivalent mode locking threshold eld derived
in this manner (Eq. (11b)) is quite similar in mag-
nitude and relative 1,1 and 3,1 harmonic weighting
to the equivalent mode locking eld obtained fromthe COMPASS-D experiments. Although there aresome dierences in the weighting factors (relative to2,1) for the 1,1 and 3,1 harmonics, the basic formand magnitude (with typical harmonic content) ofthe DIII-D and COMPASS-D results agree withinabout 20%. For example, with the assumption ofan ‘ITER like’ 2/1/0.67 harmonic mix (1,1, 2,1 and
3,1 modes, respectively) and with the out of phase
terms in Eq. (10) omitted, the equivalent elds B
pen
obtained from Eqns (10) and (11b) are, respectively,
2:3B2;1and 1:9B2;1.
The limited range in q95of 1.4 and in Btof 1.4 (at
xedq95) makes the DIII-D best t exponents rel-
atively uncertain. However, within the uncertainty,the relative error eld ( B
pen=Bt) does not increase
much faster than 1 =Bt. The issue of qandBtscaling
of the error eld threshold in other experiments willbe addressed below.
The COMPASS-D and DIII-D harmonic mix vari-
ation experiments are important for two reasons.First, they show that to understand the locked modephysics in a given machine where the mode mixvaries, it is important that harmonic coupling eectsbe taken into account. Second, these results showthat the contributions of the 1,1 and 3,1 harmon-ics to locking of the 2,1 mode are appreciable, and,hence, that it may be desirable (or necessary) to cor-rect the (1,1), (2,1) and (3,1) error eld components
independently. The (1,1) correction may be neces-
sary, despite the relatively weak coupling, because(1,1) eld errors will typically be larger than (2,1)or (3,1) eld errors (the amplitude of the error eldspectra that arise from coil construction and posi-tioning tolerances typically scale approximately as1=m).
2.5.3.2. Plasma and machine parameter scalings
We return now to the dependence of the penetra-
tion threshold on plasma and machine parameters.We assume that this dependence has a power lawform
B
pen=Bt/nnBB
tqq
95RR
2290 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 42 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
which is in line with assuming a power law form for
the connement time in Eq. (7). Dimensional scaling
considerations (see [137] and also Chapter 2) show
that for ohmic plasmas we can expect 8 n+5B−
4R= 0. Experiments in COMPASS-D and JET
with well determined harmonic content and singleparameter ( n
e,BtorIp) variations to determine the
nandBcoecients have been performed. The
DIII-D experiments cited above yield similar data,albeit with the need to perform a regression t to thedata set to separate harmonic mix variation eects
from plasma parameter variation eects. The result
of this t is given in Eqns (11a) and (11b). Thevarious experimentally determined coecients are
summarized in Table 2.
There is very good agreement on the scaling of
the density threshold ( 
n). The scaling with toroidal
eld (B) agrees within error bars between JET
and DIII-D but diers signicantly for COMPASS-
D. The dierence in the eld scalings of the three
data sets { extrapolated to the same density, q95and
eective harmonic amplitude { is explicitly shownin Fig. 27. The COMPASS-D and JET scalings areclearly dierent, while the DIII-D scaling matchesthe JET scaling, albeit with signicant uncertaintyowing to the limited range of B
tvariation.
The cause of the toroidal eld scaling dierences
between COMPASS-D and JET (and DIII-D) is
not yet understood. However, it is found that thevariation of measured plasma velocity with toroidaleld is stronger in COMPASS-D than in the largermachines, and it is thought that this variation (whichcan, in turn, aect the error eld threshold) mayunderlie the stronger toroidal eld ( 
B) scaling. The
dierences in qseen in Table 2 may be due to dier-
ent error eld harmonic compositions and their vari-
ation as the edge qchanges. While there is present
uncertainty as to the qscaling, this uncertainty does
not appreciably aect extrapolation to ITER/reactorconditions, since the dierences between safety fac-tors in the present experimental data and proposedITER/reactor safety factors are small.
2.5.3.3. High- eects
The data presented above all address the eect of
error elds on low density, low- ohmically heated
plasmas. There is ample experimental evidence thatadding even modest amounts of toroidally unbal-anced NBI signicantly improves the tolerance ofsuch ‘NBI driven’ plasmas to error eld mode lock-ing, and both ‘early’ and ‘late’ application of NBI0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
Bt (T)10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6Bpen/BtCOMPASS-DDIII-D
JETITER
(q95 = 3)
ne = 1.6 x 10 19 m-3, q95 = 3.3
Figure 27. Error eld penetration threshold ( Bpen=Bt)
in COMPASS-D ( R=0:56 m), DIII-D ( R=1:7m )a n d
JET (R=2:95 m), scaled for ne=1:61019m−3and
q95=3:3. The error eld harmonic mix varies among the
three experiments. The data plotted are the equivalent
2,1 eld as evaluated using Eq. (10) for COMPASS-D
and JET and Eq. (11 b) for DIII-D. The single exper-iment toroidal eld scalings ( 
B) given in Table 2 are
also shown.
are well known methods for locked mode disruption
avoidance during the start-up and shutdown phasesof presently operating tokamaks. However, experi-
mental error eld tolerance results obtained in DIII-
D (Fig. 28) show that while the initial benet of NBIinduced rotation is appreciable, the locked mode tol-erance of high- , beam heated plasmas eventually
decreases as the beta increases.
For H-mode plasmas, the deterioration of error
eld tolerance can be explained in terms of theenhanced tearing mode instability that the strongpressure gradients characteristic of H-mode conne-ment produce [138]. Note in Fig. 28 that at highbeta (near the ideal MHD or Troyon limit) theerror eld tolerance of 2 10
−4seen at high den-
sity (5 1019m−3) is comparable to the error eld
tolerance seen for low density ohmic start-up plasmas
at 21019m−3.
While projection of this type of high- locked
mode susceptibility to reactor and to ITER plas-mas (which have much weaker rotation drive andwhere NBI may not be present) is a complex matter
that has not been pursued in detail, simple extrap-
olation of the DIII-D data and theoretical model toITER [138] suggest that high- error eld tolerances
may be 10
−4. In this regard, error eld sensitivi-
ties during the high- DT burn phase appear to be
similar to those during the low- start-up phase.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2291

--- Page 43 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Table 2. Parameter dependence of the penetration eld threshold scaling
[Values in parentheses are inferred by addition.]
n B qB+q
Parameter(s) variedDensityIpandBt,w i t h IpBt
Ip=Btheld xed
JET 0.94 −1:2( −0:05) −1:15
DIII-D 0.99 −0:97 0.83 ( −0:14)
COMPASS-D 1.0 −2:91 . 6 −1:1
The second row gives the plasma parameter, which is varied (all others are held
xed) to determine the scaling.
0
456 21 3 01246
5
3
3.5 I/aB T
Æbæ (%)Critical B r(2,1)/BT  (10-4)
H-mode plasmas, 
k = 1.8, q 95 = 3.5,
ne = 4-5 x 10 19 m-3
1-5 MW co-NBI
Figure 28. Error eld tolerance versus for DIII-D
beam heated H-mode plasmas.
2.5.4. Implications for ITER
Error eld thresholds have been determined for
ohmic plasmas with the ITER like shape, q95and
density, and so, to extrapolate these results to ITERstart-up plasmas, it remains only to take account ofthe size and B
tscaling. The scaling to the ITER
toroidal eld using the scalings from COMPASS-D ,D I I I - Da n dJ E Ti ss h o w ni nF i g .2 7 .D e t e r -mining the size scaling is more problematic: sincethe COMPASS-D data are apparently in a dierent
regime (dierent B
tscaling) it cannot be used in
an empirical cross machine extrapolation to ITER.In addition, given the accuracy of the penetra-tion threshold data (due in part to dierences inthe error eld spectra and in part to basic mea-surement uncertainties) and the limited dierencein major radius between DIII-D and JET (1.7 m
and 3.0 m), a ‘two machine’ empirical extrapola-tion based on DIII-D and JET is also rather uncer-tain. Alternatively, the size scaling can be inferredindirectly on a ‘single machine’ basis from the
dimensional constraint ( 
R=2n+1:25B). For
JET, DIII-D and COMPASS-D this gives R=
0:40:2, 0:790:3a n d −1:65, respectively. Deter-
mining the size scaling in this way is again notwholly satisfactory (there are no compelling inde-pendent data to demonstrate that the dimensionalconstraint is actually obeyed), but is the best thatcan be done at present. Here again, JET andDIII-D results are in approximate agreement andsuggest a modestly favourable positive size scal-
ing (the allowable normalized error eld increases
with size, all other factors being equal). In contrast,the COMPASS-D size scaling suggests a stronglyunfavourable scaling.
In ITER it is likely that the time of greatest dan-
ger for inducing a locked mode will occur during thelow density phase ( n
e21019m−3)r e q u i r e df o r
H-mode access. For ITER at this density and with
q95=3:3, the threshold ( B2;1=Bt) for a pure (2,1)
eld is 1:2510−4and 2:010−4obtained, respec-
tively, by using the JET and DIII-D values for R
andB. Given the typical 2/1/0.67 1,1, 2,1, 3,1 har-
monic mix expected in ITER, the allowable 2,1 com-ponents will, respectively, be about 6 10
−5and
1010−5. Allowable error eld magnitudes arising
from extrapolation of the COMPASS-D results aremore than an order of magnitude smaller, but, given
the apparently dierent physics regime, these predic-
tions are thought to be less reliable. This is particu-larly highlighted by extrapolations from COMPASS-D to JET, which dier from the actual JET data byan order of magnitude in error. Finally, we observethat if we disregard the COMPASS-D data and inter-
2292
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 44 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
pret the DIII-D and JET data presented in Fig. 27
as showing no discernible (strong) size scaling, a sim-
ple eld scaling only extrapolation of the DIII-D and
JET data to ITER eld (5.7 T) yields an equivalent(multi-mode weighted) normalized allowable erroreld ofB
pen=BT710−5.
We also note parenthetically here that most toka-
maks built to date have been able to (eventually)
achieve inherent ‘as built’ or ‘as corrected’ error
elds (B2;1=Bt) in the range of 1{3 10−4.G i v e n
this achievement, inherent construction arising errorelds do not normally result in appreciable opera-tional limitations in present tokamaks except in thelow density ohmic plasma regime (several tokamaksencounter noerror eld generated locked mode prob-
lems). We also note that projections of the construc-tion and alignment accuracies expected for the ITER
PF and toroidal eld coils suggest that the ‘as built’
ITER 2,1 error elds will be 10
−4. While consid-
eration of the ‘engineering’ feasibility of achieving10
−4error elds in ITER is beyond the scope of
this Section, we believe on the basis of past expe-rience in present tokamaks that it is likely that errorelds of this magnitude can (and will) be obtainedin ITER and reactor tokamaks, and that these errorelds will have an appreciable eect upon mode lock-ing in start-up plasmas in these tokamaks. Provision
of error eld correction to ensue robust tolerance to
error elds during start-up therefore seems prudent.In addition, since simple extrapolation of presenthigh-error eld tolerance data to ITER suggests
that similar (or perhaps higher) sensitivities to errorelds may arise during the high- burn phase, error
eld correction, likely with multi-mode capability,appears to be a doubly prudent addition to the mag-netic/plasma control capabilities of ITER and reac-
tor tokamaks. The availability of a multi-mode error
eld variation capability in ITER would also allowthe eects of externally applied RMPs to be deni-tively investigated in a reactor regime plasma exper-iment.
2.5.5. Error eld correction and other locked
mode avoidance means
Given that error elds are likely to impose oper-
ational limits for ITER start-up and DT burn, error
eld detection and correction methods need to beconsidered. Both COMPASS-C and DIII-D haveused in situ detection coil arrays to determine error
elds. In the case of DIII-D, a coil array was tem-porarily installed within the vacuum vessel to mea-sure PF coil produced error elds [136]. In the case
of COMPASS-C, a measuring coil array was perma-
nently installed outside the vacuum vessel and was
used to minimize errors during construction [139].JET experiments have determined the error eld(though not its detailed sideband structure), with aplasma based detection method, by making measure-ments with a range of applied error eld phases [140].On DIII-D, the contribution to the error eld spec-trum from the TF coils is determined by multivariatets.
Correction of error elds using coils external
to the plasma is routinely used on DIII-D wherePF coil construction and alignment errors haveresulted in ‘as built’ error elds of approximately7G(B
r(2;1)=2:1T )310−4) [127]. These error
elds are large enough to cause locked mode dicul-ties, especially at reduced B
t1 T, for ohmic plas-
mas with densities 21019m−3. The recent addi-
tion of a ‘C coil’ correction coil set (six 60picture
frame coils located external to the TF coil) combinedwith use of the previously installed ‘ n= 1’ correc-
tion coil (a single o centre coil, located above theTF coil, which produces a mix of harmonics) [127]has made simultaneous correction of the 3,1 and 2,1modes possible, thereby allowing locked mode freeplasma operation to be extended to densities below110
19m−3. In this regard, previous attempts to
correct the as built errors with the ‘ n=1 ’c o i l
alone were not as successful, apparently owing to
the introduction of increased ‘sideband’ modes (1,1and 3,1) when the dominant 2,1 error eld was cor-rected. Given a ‘multi-mode’ sensitivity to sidebandharmonics, as is embodied in Eqns (10) and (11b),some care (sideband mode control) in applying cor-rections is needed to avoid compromising the intentof correcting the 2,1 error eld. On COMPASS-D, itwas shown that error eld correction may be achieved
without detailed matching between the spectrum of
the error eld and correction coil [141]. However,higher sensitivity to eld errors in ITER may makemore detailed matching of the correction spectrum(multi-mode correction, as in DIII-D) more impor-tant. The issue here { related to which harmonicscan be independently controlled { is aected by thedetailed design (including the number of independentcoils sets) of the ITER correction coil system.
Measurement of the ‘as built’ ITER error elds
to the required precision with an in situ coil array
appears technically feasible [142], but will requireboth a relatively elaborate in torus apparatus andscheduling of the measurement when the toroidal and
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2293

--- Page 45 ---

ITER Physics Basis
PF coil systems can be energized to nearly full lev-
els. Development of an ecient plasma based error
eld correction assessment means or procedure would
obviate what otherwise appears to be a signicantcost and schedule time requirement in the ITERdevice commissioning sequence. The availability ofplasma based systems would also eliminate concernsabout the diculties that would be encountered inITER (or a reactor) if the in torus apparatus hadto be reinstalled to realign coils or check error eldcharacteristics after nuclear (DT burning) operation
commences.
There are also a number of non-magnetic means
for avoiding locked mode diculties. Experimentson COMPASS-D have showed that ECRH resonantnearq= 2 can remove error eld locked modes
[141]. Another possibility for avoiding locked modes
is to raise the error eld threshold by using NBI
to increase the plasma rotation. For start-up lockedmode avoidance, counter injection would be the mostecient means of doing this, since it adds to theintrinsic ohmic rotation, which is in the electron drift(counter) direction. Simple calculations [142] indi-cate that 5{10 MW of tangential counter injected1 MeV beams in ITER would increase the error eldthreshold by about a factor of 5. Slightly higherpower co-injected beams { the present ITER design
basis, chosen for reasons of NBI current drive ori-
entation { would have the same eect. The increasein error eld threshold with NBI has been demon-strated experimentally on JET during eld rippleexperiments [143] and on DIII-D in L-mode plas-mas [138].
2.5.6. Summary
Best present extrapolations to ITER based on
JET and DIII-D data indicate an error eld thresh-
old to induce a locked mode in low density ohmicplasmas of B
r2;1=Bt10−4, though some uncer-
tainty remains over the size scaling. Given that errorelds of the same magnitude are projected to arisefrom ITER construction tolerances, error eld cor-rection appears prudent. Several error eld correc-tion methods (correction coils, ECRH and NBI rota-tion) have been shown to be viable experimentally
in present tokamaks. Further work is needed, and
planned, to resolve discrepancies over the toroidaleld dependence of the locked mode threshold. Alsothe eects of error elds in high- regimes, where the
critical error eld for locking decreases as the betalimit is approached or where error elds may act asthe seed for neoclassical modes (Section 2.2), need
to be investigated further. It is also possible (likely)
in ITER that the provision of an ECRH or ECCD
MHD island control capability to limit the size ofsaturated neoclassical islands may prove equally use-ful in avoiding the occurrence of error eld inducedlocked modes. However, both the neoclassical islandand locked tearing mode mitigation aspects of suchRF control methods remain to be demonstrated andcarefully studied in present tokamaks.
2.6. ELMs and MHD in the plasma edge
ELMs and other MHD instabilities localized in the
plasma edge region (dened roughly as comprisingthe last 5% of the closed ﬂux surfaces) of a tokamakplay a key role in mediating the energy and particletransport characteristics of the plasma edge in theregime of enhanced global energy connement; calledthe high connement mode (H-mode). The transitionfrom low connement mode (L-mode) to high con-
nement mode (H-mode) in magnetic connement
systems is normally accompanied by the appearancein the H-mode phase of periodic edge instability phe-nomena, that have come to be known as ELMs [19].The underlying causative mechanism for ELMs is theonset of MHD instability in the plasma edge whenthe edge pressure gradient exceeds a critical thresh-old. The subsequent loss of edge connement leads toa temporary reduction of the pressure gradient, andthe eventual recovery of the pressure gradient leads
to recurrence of the ELM. This cycle, which con-
tinues indenitely in a sustained H-mode discharge,is a ubiquitous feature of such long pulse H-modeplasmas. The reference plasma operation mode forITER is projected to be with an ELMing (or ELMy)H-mode.
The study and categorization of ELMs and their
eect on plasma energy connement in the plasmacore and on the power and particle ﬂow to the diver-tor region encompass a subject of considerable rich-ness and scope. This Section of the ITER Physics
Basis approaches ELMs and related edge instabil-
ities largely from the viewpoint of the ideal andnon-ideal MHD stability considerations that applyto their occurrence and characteristics. How these
MHD stability aspects extrapolate to reactor toka-
maks and to ITER is also addressed here. Sincemuch of the present understanding of ELMs derivesfrom their phenomenology, the material that followshere necessarily begins with a brief presentation ofthis phenomenology and the resulting categorization
2294
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 46 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
of ELMs that arises. A more comprehensive pre-
sentation of the phenomenology and categorization
aspects of ELMs is given in Chapter 4. The eects of
ELMs on plasma energy connement are addressedin detail in Chapter 2.
2.6.1. ELMs and other edge MHD instabilities
ELMs were rst observed upon discovery of the
H-mode in auxiliary heated divertor plasmas inASDEX [144] and have subsequently been univer-sally observed in all divertor tokamaks and also
in limiter tokamaks in certain operational regimes.
In all cases, the most immediate manifestations ofELMs are characteristic sharp periodic increases inD
(orH) emission from the divertor or limiter
region. These increases are caused by a temporarybreakdown of the H-mode edge connement bar-rier. As a result, plasma particles and energy areexpelled, and the enhanced recycling increases D

emission. ELMs are also accompanied by various
edge region ﬂuctuations (both magnetic and kinetic)
and localized bursts of MHD activity, including mag-netic precursors, and there are also directly observ-able changes in the edge region plasma temperatureand density proles and energy content. In theseregards, the basic phenomenology of ELMs { theperiodic MHD initiated loss of edge connement andpressure and the subsequent release of energy andparticles to the plasma dening surfaces in a toka-mak { is well understood.
The cycle of ELM breakdown and prole recovery
repeats on a more or less periodic basis, typicallywith some quasi-stochastic variation in period andD
magnitude. The relative amplitude of the initial
Dburst and the repetition period and frequency
coherency of the ELMs obtained in a given experi-
ment vary, but, in a broad sense, depend primarily
upon the proximity of the plasma operation condi-tions to the H-mode edge power threshold (see ELMphenomenology below and also Chapters 2 and 4).A number of types of ELM with dierent ampli-tude, frequency and power dependences can be dis-tinguished: the principal types relevant to ITER areanticipated to be small amplitude, high frequencytype III ELMs, which appear when the power ﬂow
to the plasma edge is only marginally above the H-
mode edge power ﬂow threshold (see Section 2.4),and the higher amplitude, lower frequency type IELMs, which develop when the edge power ﬂow sig-nicantly exceeds the H-mode threshold. Figure 29shows an example of the D
intensity waveforms forthese two types of ELMs in a representative divertor
experiment. As will be presented, the occurrence of
these two types of ELMs can be ascribed to two dis-
tinct MHD instability mechanisms. Since the oper-ation regime for ITER is anticipated to be nearthe projected operation domain boundaries for bothtype I and type III ELMs (see Fig. 31 and associ-ated text below), understanding of both mechanismsis needed for ITER.
ELM-free Type IIIType I 
Da intensity (in divertor) L-mode H-mode
Time (s)0.5 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 1.02 MW 10 MW 2  –> 10 MW NBI Power
Figure 29. Divertor region Dintensity in a typical
DIII-D plasma with slowly increasing NBI power. Lowamplitude type III ELMs appear after the L{H tran-sition, when low NBI power is applied, and disappearas power is slowly increased. Larger type I ELMs withincreasing frequency appear at high power. Summarizedfrom a more complete data set presented in Fig. 2 ofRef. [19].
Figure 29 also shows an ELM free period between
the periods where type III and type I ELMs occur.‘ELM free’ H-modes, sometimes without clear indica-tion of preliminary type III ELMs, are also obtained
transiently in many tokamaks, especially under con-
ditions of high power input and rapid L{H transition.The ELM free period is generally interpreted as beingdue to the nite time required for the edge pressuregradient to reach the level required for onset of atype I ELM, with the discharge then subsequentlyeither lapsing into repetitive type I ELMing or, ifthe amplitude of the rst ELM is large enough (a‘giant’ ELM), terminating disruptively following therst ELM. In other plasma operation regimes, sus-
tained repetitive type III or type II ELMs (see below)
may develop rather than repetitive type I ELMs.
Other types of edge MHD instability are also pos-
sible. In hot ion H-mode plasmas in JET, the ELMfree phase can also be terminated by onset of theso-called outer mode ,a10 kHzn=1 ,m=3 {
5 sustained MHD oscillation that is typically local-
ized in the outer 20% of the plasma [145]. Theouter mode, which causes a degradation of centralconnement and DD neutron yield (Fig. 30), is, insome examples, followed by a giant ELM that fur-ther degrades connement and DD yield. Edge MHD
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2295

--- Page 47 ---

ITER Physics Basis
instabilities with characteristics similar to the JET
outer modes have been seen in ASDEX, DIII-D and
JT-60U (see [145] and references therein). The MHD
mechanism responsible for the outer modes appearsto be distinct from the mechanism responsible forgiant ELMs, but the eects of both types of MHDactivity on edge and global connement character-istics are somewhat similar, including the enhance-ment of divertor D
during mode activity and the
sustained eect of an outer mode or ELM on centralconnement, which continues even after the MHD
event that comprises the ELM itself or the outer
mode is over.
Da (a. u.)
RDD (~6 x 10 16 s-1 max.)
no data no dataWdia (~8 MJ max.)
Bq (a. u.)~.outer mode
12.0 12.5 14.0 13.0 13.5
Time (s)
Figure 30. Magnetic ﬂuctuation amplitude and divertor
Dintensity indications of an ‘outer mode’ MHD event in
a JET hot ion H-mode deuterium discharge (no. 33648).The 100 ms outer mode MHD event results in a corre-sponding transient increase in divertor D
and also ini-
tiates a prompt and irreversible deterioration of plasmaenergy connement and DD neutron yield. Applied NBI
power is constant for the full data period (12{14 s) shown.
Summarized from a more complete data set presented inFig. 1 of Ref. [145].
ELMs have a number of global and local eects
on plasma performance and the exhaust of plasmapower and particles (hydrogen and impurities) by thedivertor. Repetitive type I or type III ELMing usu-ally results in some net deterioration of global energyconnement relative to the connement that can betransiently obtained during the corresponding ELMfree phase of a discharge (see Chapter 2, Sections 5and 6). Type I ELMs generally have less conne-
ment impact than type III ELMs (see Chapter 2, Sec-
tions 5, 6 and [19]), but ELMs have a benecial eectwith regard to the prevention of density and impu-rity accumulation by periodically exhausting parti-cles that would otherwise be well conned withint h eH - m o d ee d g eb a r r i e r .I ti se n v i s a g e dt h a tI T E Rwill operate in ELMy H-mode because the periodic
increases in the plasma transport at the edge due
to ELMs will avoid impurity accumulation problems
and allow control of the plasma density and impuritylevels. It is also not possible to see how the onset ofELMs can be avoided for the 1000 s duration of the
ITER discharge ﬂat-top.
On the other hand, it is necessary in ITER that
the level of ELMs does not seriously compromise theenergy connement properties of the H-mode (seeChapter 2, Sections 4.2 and 5.2). Furthermore, thetransient heat loads deposited in the divertor by theELM must not be too large, in order to avoid ther-mal damage to the target plates. Finally, there is
widespread evidence that large amplitude ELMs can
couple to other MHD phenomena (e.g. neoclassicalisland tearing modes, Section 2.3) and thus cause adeterioration in core connement (Chapter 2), or ini-tiate disruption (Section 4.1), or a loss of equilibriumcontrol vertical displacement event (Section 4.3).There are, therefore, many reasons why ELM physicsis an important issue for ITER and why optimizationand/or control of ELMs will be important for overallplasma optimization in ITER and reactor tokamaks.
Understanding and controlling the MHD instability
that causes ELMs is an important aspect of the prob-lem.
2.6.2. ELM phenomenology and categories
Present understanding of ELMs is largely phe-
nomenological, and while there is progress towardsdeveloping rst principles theories of ELMs (see Sec-tion 2.6.3) and assessing their eect on plasma per-formance, at present, understanding of ELM eects,and how these eects may extrapolate to future
devices, is largely based upon phenomenology. It is
therefore necessary here to go into this phenomenol-ogy in some detail and to try to ascertain how it isaected by plasma and operation parameters (size,shape, eld, power, etc.). As will become apparentduring this presentation, ELM phenomenology con-tains a considerable richness and signicant experi-ment specic features, and ELM theory is still imma-ture, so denitive extrapolation to ITER and reactor
tokamaks is still a matter of ongoing discussion in the
fusion community.
2.6.2.1. ELM types
At least three major types of ELMs have been
dened [19]. In a given experiment, the level of theplasma heating power, P, or, more directly, the net
2296
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 48 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
p o w e rr e a c h i n gt h ep l a s m ae d g e Pedge=P−Prad
(i.e. heating power less radiation losses inside the
edge region) is a key factor in determining the ELM
type. For heating input or edge power levels at thecorresponding threshold for H-mode, P
th, so-called
‘dithering’ ELMs have been identied; these arebelieved to be transitions back and forth between L-mode and H-mode. With increasing power, type III(or ‘small’) ELMs are encountered; their frequencydecreases with power. As the power increases fur-ther, the type III ELMs tend to disappear and
an ELM free H-mode may be encountered, but, at
higher power levels, larger amplitude type I (some-times called ‘giant’) ELMs appear: their frequencyincreases with increasing power. A further class ofELMs called type II (or, sometimes, ‘grassy’ ELMs)are associated with strongly shaped tokamaks at highedge pressure when there is access to second stabil-ity at the plasma edge. High values of the parameters=q
2(magnetic shear/ q2) in the plasma edge appear
to be the principal factor in determining the onset
of type II ELMs. Type II ELMs are anticipated to
be relevant to ITER only for steady state operationmodes predicated on enhanced plasma performance(see Section 2.7) with plasmas that have higher elon-gation and triangularity than standard ITER plas-mas.
2.6.2.2. Occurrence of ELMs
The circumstances under which ELMs appear pro-
vide clues to the underlying phenomena. These con-
ditions can be best characterized not in terms ofthe core plasma parameters, but rather in terms ofthe edge electron density n
e(edge) and temperature,
Te(edge), where the nomenclature ‘edge’ denotes the
parameters at the top of the H-mode edge tem-perature pedestal. In medium sized tokamaks (e.g.ASDEX-Upgrade), this edge location is typicallyabout 2 cm inside the separatrix as measured at
the outboard midplane, at r=a=0:96. In ITER,
the corresponding edge location would be about10 cm inside the separatrix. Figure 31 illustrates then
e(edge){Te(edge) domains for L-mode and H-mode
operation in ASDEX-Upgrade, and also the corre-sponding domains for type I and type III ELMs andalso for transient ELM free operation.
Figure 30 illustrates the important and widely
obtained nding that type I ELMs appear to beclosely connected with normalized local edge pres-sure gradients, , near the ideal MHD ballooning
limit,
c[19]. Measurements of type I ELMs in JET0 4 6 8 10 200.20.40.6Te (at a - 2 cm)  (keV)
ne (at a - 2 cm)  (1019 m-3) Ideal MHD unstable
Radiation unstableL-modeH-mode
type III ELMsH-mode
type I ELMs
ELM-free H-mode
(not stationary)
Type I ELMs
Compound ELMs
Type III ELMs
L-Mode
L Density LimitH-modeIdeal ballooning limitIp = 1 MA
Ip = 0.8 MA
Figure 31. H-mode operational diagram for ASDEX-
Upgrade presented in terms of the measured electrontemperature and density 2 cm inside the separatrix (thislocation corresponds to the top of the H-mode pedestal).Boundaries indicating dierent types of connementregime are marked [257]. The limiting bound of edge pres-sure (nT) corresponds closely to the predicted pressure
gradient for onset of ideal MHD ballooning (‘ideal bal-
looning limit’).
that trace the edge pressure gradient trajectories in
time show that such ELMs approach this ideal MHDlimit [146], but some additional trigger event (e.g.
an external kink) appears necessary to precipitate
the ELM. Scaling studies on ASDEX-Upgrade alsoshow that type I ELMs are associated with the idealMHD ballooning limit [147], but the discharge can sitat the ballooning limit for some time before an ELMoccurs [148], again suggesting the need for an addi-tional trigger, such as a low- nedge localized ‘peel-
ing’ mode, where nis the toroidal mode number (see
‘Ideal MHD’ discussion below).
A similar correlation for type I ELM onset with

cis seen in JT-60U [14,149]; furthermore, the tri-
angularity(−0:06<< 0:4) has been varied with
results in accord with the triangularity dependenceof
c(in particular, as on JET, type II ELMs are
seen at high , associated with second stability).
Studies in DIII-D [150] also show that type I ELMsoccur for
c; it would appear that these ELMs
can occur in ballooning stable situations, suggestingthat while ideal ballooning limits the pressure
gradient, some other phenomenon is responsible
for the ELM itself, since type I ELMs can alsooccur in situations where the n= 1 ideal external
kink is stable. More recent detailed edge pressuremeasurements made for type I ELMs in DIII-Dwith a high resolution Thomson scattering system
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2297

--- Page 49 ---

ITER Physics Basis
show that (2{3)cis consistently obtained
in plasmas with an ITER similar SND shape and
aspect ratio (Fig. 32). The data show no apparent
sensitivity to s=q2. While the scaling clearly that
for ideal ballooning, why the magnitude of thepressure gradient substantially exceeds the idealMHD instability threshold is not yet understood.
aMHD
s/q20.00246
0.2 0.1 0.3 0.4ITER shape, data for last 20% of Type I ELM cycle
Figure 32. Ideal MHD ballooning stability comparison
data for type I ELMs in DIII-D plasmas with ITER likeshape (qvaries). The pressure gradient measured prior
to type I ELM onset consistently exceeds twice the cal-
culated ideal ballooning gradient threshold.
Type II grassy ELMs occur in shaped plas-
mas at low s=q2(wheresis the shear parameter
s=d(lnq)=d(lnr), andqis the safety factor),
corresponding to access to second stability. Laterstudies have shown that can exceed 
c[151]
and that calculations taking full account of theequilibria, and the bootstrap current, are necessary
for discussing second stability but are sensitive to
details [152]. H-mode operation in Alcator C-Modwith ICRF heating has, to date, yielded onlypreliminary type III ELMs followed by an ELM freeperiod, the latter despite pressure gradients with
c. The lack of type I ELMs may be associated
with the ICRH: ELMs in JET are smaller withICRH than with equivalent neutral beam heating(NBI) [153]. Type III ELMs in ASDEX-Upgrade
tend to appear below a critical electron temperature
T
e<300 eV [148]; this suggests a role for resistivity
and the possible involvement of resistive ballooningmodes. This hypothesis is reinforced by the observa-tion that type III ELMs can be stabilized by a saw-tooth heat pulse and promoted by radiative cooling.Type III ELMs in DIII-D were originally charac-
terized as appearing when 0 :3< = 
c<0:5 [150],
but recent analysis [151] shows that two classes of
type III ELMs exist: low- netype III, which disap-
pear above a critical value of (corresponding to a
critical power P/I2:4=n2
e); and high- netype III,
which disappear above a critical temperature.
These observations as to the role of factors other
than the pressure gradient in determining ELM type
and stability are consistent with the observation of
what are now recognized to be type III ELMs in theoriginal ASDEX H-mode experiments (the ASDEXobservations were made at a time when distinc-tions among ELM types were not yet recognized).Only one type of ELM { resembling the type IIIELMs in DIII-D { was seen. Recent experiments inDIII-D that retroactively reproduced the ASDEXplasma conguration and parameters recovered asimilar behaviour: only type III rather than type I
ELMs were seen, indicating, again, that plasma
parameters other than ideal ballooning stability,such asT
e, play an important role in determining
ELM characteristics and MHD stability [150]. Theinterpreters of Alcator C-Mod data have suggestedthat type III ELMs seen in their experiments areassociated with steep edge density gradients, whichcan excite micro-tearing modes [154]. The sensitivityof ELM characteristics to geometrical parameters,
such as shaping and plasma{wall separations, has
been demonstrated on TCV [155].
Finally, in COMPASS-D [156], ELMs disappear
above a critical value of 
Nand can be suppressed
by edge current ramp-up: this eect was also seen(but less clearly) on PBX-M [157]. The ability ofexternally applied resonant magnetic perturbations(RMPs) to trigger ELMs is suggestive that some
tearing mode involvement in ELMs may be neces-
sary [156] (see Section 2.5).
2.6.2.3. ELM repetition frequencies
The power dependence of ELM frequencies, f
ELM,
has been used as a way of dening ELM types; thefrequencies are also signicant for estimating trans-port losses due to ELMs. In the case of giant ELMsin JET,f
ELMcan be tted in terms of the heat-
ing powerPand plasma current Iby the expres-
sionfELM=8:9(P−Prad)=I1:84(Hz, MW, MA),
wherePradis the radiated power. This result shows
that ELM frequency scales linearly with the powercrossing the separatrix [158]. In JET NBI discharges,f
ELMdecreases with triangularity and increases
2298 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 50 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
with gas input [159]. In JT-60U, a strong link
betweenfELMand the ballooning stability param-
eter [14, 149] is found, i.e. fELM/PnetRq2=B2‘i,
wherePnetis the net heating power and ‘iis the
internal inductance. As in JET, fELMin JT-60U
varies inversely with in NBI discharges. Propor-
tionality of ELM frequency to separatrix power isalso observed in ASDEX-Upgrade: indeed, a scalinglawf
ELM/Psep=Ihas been proposed, although this
scaling is also found to be aected by the use of gaspus and impurity injection [160]. These results are
supportive of the idea that f
ELMfor type I ELMs is
set by the heating time for the pressure gradient toreach
c. For type III ELMs in COMPASS-D, fELM
can be reduced by edge heating with ECRH { this
observation is consistent with type III stabilizationby increasing T
e{a n dfELMdoes not seem to depend
onI[156].
2.6.2.4. Energy loss from ELMs
Measurements of the edge power losses attribut-
a b l et ot h ep e r i o d i cr e c u r r e n c eo ft y p eIE L M sp r o -vide further support for the ballooning limit insta-bility origin of such ELMs. For type I ELMs withf
ELM/Psep, where the pre-ELM edge pressure gra-
dient,p0, is at the ballooning limit, p0
c,o v e raw i d t h
r, the energy in the edge region scales as ( r)2p0
c.
If a constant fraction Wof this energy is lost dur-
ing the ELM and if  ris independent of power,
then the time average loss fraction P=P should be
power and ELM frequency independent [19]. ELM
losses of a constant percentage of input power arefrequently observed [158,160,161], so such observa-tions are consistent with the hypothesis that type IELMs are determined by ideal ballooning with  r
approximately constant. However, detailed analysisof the fate of the lost energy shows that the actualloss process may be more complex than just simpleballooning, and this observation helps to discrim-
inate against some theories. In particular, energy
loss is notalways dominantly on the low eld side
(LFS) as might be expected for ballooning modes[151, 162]. Furthermore, the identication of non-thermal electron losses suggests that magnetic recon-nection is involved in the ELM [156,162{164]. Theenergy loss process can be modelled satisfactorily interms of stochastic magnetic eld transport based onthe observed magnetic precursors [165].
The majority of the energy loss from the ELM
ultimately reaches the divertor plates, resulting intransient heat loads. For an ITER class tokamak,large magnitude type I ELMs have sucient energy
to cause appreciable divertor surface heating and ero-
sion, and, hence, avoidance of sustained operation
with large amplitude type I ELMs is a potentiallyimportant issue for ITER. The subject of ELM pro-duced heat ﬂuxes on the divertor plates is discussedin Chapter 4.
2.6.2.5. ELM precursors and ﬂuctuations
A variety of ﬂuctuations are observed in con-
junction with the ELM cycle. Magnetic ‘precursors’,
which may have a causal relationship to, or act as
a trigger for, the ELM burst of magnetic ﬂuctua-tions and transport, are of particular interest. Theseprecursors have been seen most clearly for type IIIELMs, but there are also observations in some toka-maks of precursors for type I or ‘large type III’ ELMs.Table 3 summarizes the various observations. Detailsare discussed below, but, brieﬂy, type III ELMs haveclear magnetic precursors with n5{15, balloon-
ing structures, f100 kHz, and resistive growth
times. Precursors are less evident for type I ELMs,
when turbulence grows on an ideal MHD time-scale,although toroidal asymmetries suggest that someother mode acts as a trigger. Precursor frequenciesf o rt y p eIE L M so f t e nd r o pj u s tb e f o r et h e D
burst.
Observations in the various tokamaks vary some-
what at the detailed level. In JET there are clear
edge localized precursors (mode numbers, frequen-
cies, radial localization and growth times are givenin Table 3) for type III ELMs [166], but only erraticshort lived low frequency precursors for type I ELMs[167]. Type I ELMs instead exhibit bursts of 25{30 kHz MHD activity, with complex structure notconned to the plasma edge or divertor regions,growing in 30s, i.e. at the ideal MHD growth rate.
In JET hot ion H-modes, type I ELMs are generallypreceded by an outer mode [145]. A low- ncoherent
mode is detected during the ELM; observations of
toroidal asymmetry of the ELM may be related tocoupling to such a low- nmode structure [162].
On DIII-D, type III ELMs typically have pre-
cursors with n= 5{10 [150], but more com-
plex behaviour with multiple modes is observedat low density [151]. For type I ELMs, no coher-
ent precursors are seen: instead broadband MHD
activity grows for 30{50 sb e f o r et h eE L M .I n
ASDEX-Upgrade [148], coherent precursors for bothtype I and type III, appearing 1m sb e f o r et h e D

rise, are seen, but the details dier somewhat for
counter-injected and co-injected neutral beams. For
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2299

--- Page 51 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Table 3. ELM precursors in various tokamaks for type I and type III ELMs
Experiment nm r(cm) f(kHz) (s)
Type III ELMs
JET 8 | 10 50{100 250
DIII-D high  ne 5{10 | | | |
low ne (6{13) | | (50{80) |
ASDEX-Upgrade 10{15 15{20 4 100 counter; |
60 co; (100, 200)
Alcator C-Mod >5>10 | 150 50
COMPASS-D | | | 70{120 200
TCV 5{8 | | 120 !70 50
JFT-2M | | | 250 ! 20
Type I ELMs (denotes possibly ‘large type III’)
JET 0{4 | 5 15 100
ASDEX-Upgrade 5{10 10{15 1{2 (20 counter); 103
5c o , ^Teonly<103
COMPASS-D3{8 | 1{2 70{120 ohmic 30
140{200 ECRH
TCV| 16{20 | 50 50
Use of parentheses denotes sometimes two or more modes.
!denotes that the frequency drops in time.
type III ELMs and counter injection, frequencies are
100 kHz, measured and estimated mode numbers
are, respectively, n= 10{15 and m= 15{20, and
the modes are localized in an edge region with radialwidth r4 cm. In the case of type I ELMs, mag-
netic precursors ( 20 kHz) are only seen for counter-
injection; although for co-injection a 5 kHz tempera-ture ﬂuctuation has been detected. The lack of mag-netic detection of precursors for co-injection may bedue to the low mode rotation frequency or becausemode locking tends to occur. Type I precursors typi-cally involve two frequencies, have n= 5{10 and m=
10{15 and are localized with  r1{2 cm. In the
case of the rotating modes, the precursors grow on a
ms time-scale, suggesting the presence of some wall
stabilization, whereas the non-rotating, or locked,precursors grow much faster, on a sub-ms time-scale.
Type III precursors are detected in COMPASS-D
[156,168] at 70{120 kHz with a growth time <200s.
For type I (or possibly larger type III ELMs), the
precursors have f70{120 kHz (ohmic) or 140{
200 kHz (ECRH). There are often two modes withn= 4 and 5, but there can also be multiple modes,
withn= 3{8. Just before the D
rise, the mode
grows on the 30 s time-scale, fdrops and the mode
evolves into an n= 1 mode, with broadband turbu-lence during the Dspike. There is also a further
drop infduring theDspike. This mode evolution
has been interpreted as a sudden interchange of ﬂuxtubes which halves mand broadens spatially, sug-
gesting resistive reconnection [169].
Type III and either type I or large type III ELMs
are seen in TCV [155]. The type III ELMs have pre-cursors that develop several 100 sb e f o r et h e D

rise. These precursors are toroidally localized on the
LFS of the plasma, with n= 5{8 [170]. These modes
grow in amplitude and toroidal extent on a time-scale50s; theD
rise and growth of magnetic
turbulence only begins when the mode has spreadtoroidally. The poloidal mode numbers mcan only
be measured in the case of large ELMs. Modes forlarge ELMs are also localized on the LFS, havef50 kHz, growth time 50s, andm= 16{20.
The toroidal localization suggests the involvement
of some other mode, e.g. a pressure gradient driventearing mode.
Type I ELMs are not seen in Alcator C-Mod [154],
despite the edge pressure gradient being near theballooning pressure limit; this may be due to ICRFheating. Type III precursors are seen and are foundto havef150 kHz,m>10,n>5 and duration
50s.
2300
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 52 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
2.6.3. Theories of ELMs
Theories of ELMs can be divided into three dier-
ent classes [172]. The rst class of models are thoseof a conceptual nature that discuss the conditions for
some underlying instability (usually within the con-
text of ideal or resistive MHD) to occur and describethe ELM cycle qualitatively in terms of the periodicbuild-up of the plasma edge conditions to triggerthe instability, the consequent loss of plasma edgeconnement, and, nally, a recovery phase for thecycle to repeat. The second class of models are thosebased on limit cycle solutions to models developed toexplain the L{H transition and formation of the H-mode edge transport barrier. These models involve
coupled equations for transport, turbulence and ﬂow
shear and are often electrostatic in nature, and so donot describe the associated MHD ﬂuctuations. Thethird class of models are limit cycle models in whichMHD activity is excited and plays a role in the trans-port. These three classes of models are summarizedbrieﬂy below. In all cases, validation and applica-tion of the models are matters of ongoing discussionwithin the fusion research community.
2.6.3.1. MHD instability theories
These theories focus upon the eect of MHD insta-
bility in initiating ELMs. Theories based upon theeects of both ideal and resistive instability havebeen developed. Both types of theory have had somesuccess in correlating the predictions of the theo-ries with the various phenomenology and precur-sor observations presented above. But as the rich-ness in the observations noted above suggests thatMHD theory alone is not expected to fully describe
all aspects of ELMs.
2.6.3.2. Ideal MHD models
Manickam [173] showed numerically that increas-
ing the edge current j
, particularly with higher p0
,
could lead to n= 1 modes, with mixed m,h a v i n g
Alfvenic growth rates. These high- m,n=1m o d e s
can be radially localized at the edge (and, hence, aretypically described as ‘peeling’ modes owing to theedge localized loss of plasma that they eect) or glob-
ally, and can be anti-ballooning, i.e. they have max-
imum amplitude on the high eld side (HFS) of theplasma. Huysmans et al.[174] have explored, numeri-
cally, the conditions for low- nexternal kink stability
in JET; in particular, an operating diagram in j

andp0
has been established. Localized external kinkmodes are destabilized by a nite j, while low values
ofp0
(c) have a weak stabilizing eect, partic-
ularly on the n= 1 mode. For higher values, c,
the external kink is destabilized by pressure, at rstfor highern; the value of the edge bootstrap cur-
rent is sucient to cause unstable kink modes in hotion H-modes. At higher poloidal and triangularity,
access to a second stable regime is possible at lowervalues ofj
, which do not excite external kinks. Cur-
rent ramps in these situations can, thus, allow accessto second stability, while avoiding peeling modes.
Connor et al. [175] considered localized peeling
modes driven by j
analytically, showing how these
can be stabilized by nite pressure through the eect
of the ‘magnetic well’ (i.e. ‘Mercier’ term) of thePrsch{Schl¨ uter currents. Thus, as the plasma is
heated, stability depends on a competition betweenthe destabilizing eects of the increase in T
e(which
increases the ohmic current and, if the collisional-ity is reduced, also the bootstrap current), and thestabilizing eects of p
0.I ft h e s ep0stabilizing eects
dominate, then, with increasing P, the ELMs will die
away, like type III ELMs, and fELMwill decrease,
since the heating delays the growth of the edge cur-
rent needed to destabilize peeling modes. If the peel-ing modes are actually stabilized, an ‘ELM free’phase can develop and can rise to the ballooning
limit, whereupon a type I ELM, triggered by a cou-pled peeling/ballooning mode, eventually ends theELM free phase after the time needed to build upsucient edge current. These prediction generally tthe generic behaviour shown in Fig. 29.
Pogutse et al.[176] considered the possibility that
ballooning modes in the scrape o layer (SOL) caninduce a giant ELM by rst releasing impurities
that subsequently weaken line tying in the edge of
the core region, leading to an interchange instabil-ity. These modes grow with a rate γc
s=(R)1=2,
wherecsis the sound speed,  is the SOL width,
andRis the major radius. They are estimated to
remove plasma in a layer  r(1=nq)a,a n df o r
n=1 ,W=W 5%, which is typical for type I
ELMs. The ELM frequency is predicted to scale asf
ELM/BP=(I30:5). These results are broadly con-
sistent with observations on JET [158].
In fact, all theories involving the ideal MHD bal-
looning limit will predict fELM/P,s i n c ePcon-
trols the heating time to reach the critical gradient.Furthermore, they will remove an amount of plasmaenergy given by W/(r)
2p0, which results in frac-
tional losses owing to ELMing that will be indepen-dent ofPto the extent that  ris a constant.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2301

--- Page 53 ---

ITER Physics Basis
2.6.3.3. Resistive MHD models
The ELM model initially developed by the
ASDEX Team [177], based on ASDEX parameters,predicted the evolution of resistive MHD modes: cur-rent driven peeling modes and resistive ballooningmodes. These modes are found to remove a layer
ra=10 in a time  t20s. Huysmans et
al.[178], who only considered JET equilibria, showed
that resistive ballooning modes with n10 were
unstable. Both these theories are able to describe thecharacteristics of type III ELMs: type III ELM sta-bility increases with increasing power since T
e(and,
hence, conductivity) increases, and fELMdecreases
since it is necessary to achieve greater values of p0

to destabilize them at higher Te.
An explanation of ELM precursors in terms of an
instability due to a relative of the so-called ‘micro-tearing’ mode has been investigated by Lau [179].The micro-tear mode, which is driven by the elec-tron temperature gradient, is found to be unstablein the steep density gradient region of the H-modepedestal, but not in the lower density gradient of anL-mode edge density prole. Kinetic eects will limit
instability to higher values of m,s o1 0<m< 40.
Thus, modes with frequencies of 100{400 kHz andgrowth times of 80{320 s are predicted; these are
proposed as an explanation of type III ELMs (in, forexample, [154]).
2.6.3.4. L{H transition theories
This class of ELM theories is based upon models
of the L-mode to H-mode transition. The theory ofItoh et al. [180] applies to ‘dithering’ ELMs near the
L{H transition: it involves no magnetic ﬂuctuations.The application of this theory, generalized to includedensity transport by Zohm [181], explains the char-acteristics of near transition ELMs in ASDEX. Thetheory of Vojtsekhovich et al. [182] considers ELM
behaviour with heating schemes (e.g. lower hybrid)
that generate fast electrons. If the electrons are not
thermalized, they can escape, possibly along braidedmagnetic elds. With increasing power Pthe plasma
is predicted to make a transition from L-mode toELMy H-mode and then to H-mode.
2.6.3.5. L{H transition theories with MHD activity
The theory of Lebedev et al. [183] involves cou-
pled, local equations for turbulent transport causedby a combination of ‘soft’ drift wave and ‘hard’ MHDﬂuctuations. The theory also considers the stabiliz-ing eects of ﬂow shear generated by Reynolds stress
and diamagnetic velocities and the damping eects
of parallel viscosity. Two situations in which the the-
ory is applicable arise. At powers near the H-modeonset threshold, with PP
th, when poloidal ﬂow
dominates, ELMing behaviour is possible. However,this ELMing phase follows an ELM free phase forlowerP. In the theory, the ELMs themselves take
the form of MHD bursts with duration  t1=γ
A,
which destroy the region of velocity shear that isresponsible for producing the H-mode transport bar-
rier. At low edge power, the theory rst predicts
f
ELM/P−1(i.e. type III ELMs), but with increas-
ing power, fELM/P(type I ELMs). The second
situation in which the theory applies corresponds toa case with greater P, when diamagnetic ﬂows dom-
inate; there is then no intermediate ELM free phase.But, again, there are MHD bursts and f
ELM/P
(i.e. type I ELMing).
The M-mode theory of Itoh et al. [184] is based
on the onset of stochastic magnetic eld transport intheir so-called ‘CDBM’ transport model at a criticalvalue ofand shows hysteresis in ;t h eM-mode
transition occurs at a lower value of than the ideal
ballooning limit 
c, say by 20{50%, while the back
transition occurs at an even lower value. The M-
mode transition is associated with a burst of MHDturbulence and a stochastic magnetic island diusiv-ity from overlapping islands, which is typically 20times greater than the L-mode diusivity 
L.T h e
growth of the MHD turbulence is on a time-scaleγ
−1
Ap,w h e r eγApis the poloidal Alfv en frequency. The
onset of the M-mode at a radial point rpprecipi-
tates an ‘avalanche’ over a region  r,r e m o v i n gt h e
pressure gradient. The ELM period is given by theheating time, so f
ELMincreases with heating power.
The theory also provides an estimate of the plasmaenergy loss Wduring an ELM: W/(r=a)W
ped,
whereWpedis the pedestal energy. These results are
in accord with observations of giant ELMs on JT-60U [14,149].
Limit cycle solutions of a transition model based
on anM-mode hysteresis diagram, but also allowing
for a probabilistic element in the parameters, are pre-
sented in [185]; ELM cycles for gradients below the
critical one can occur with nite probability. Thisaspect of the model can explain the stochastic rangeof ELM frequencies that are seen in experiments.
The transition/MHD theory of Pogutse et al.
[186] invokes resistive interchange modes in the SOL.When the parameters are far above the instabilitythreshold, the theory predicts quasi-periodic oscil-
2302
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 54 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
lations in time corresponding to spikes of density
(or heat) ﬂux at the boundary; these can be inter-
preted as ELMs. The model exhibits the property
that ELMs rst appear as increases and then, in
part since the threshold criterion scales as ( Te)−1,
subsequently disappear as Teincreases. It is there-
fore expected that fELMdecreases with P.T h e s e
behaviours mimic those for type III ELMs.
Finally, the transition/MHD theory of Horton et
al.[187] is also associated with electrostatic resistive
pressure gradient driven turbulence. These authorsalso develop equations for the evolution of the ﬂuctu-ation energy, the energy in the sheared ﬂow, and thepotential energy associated with the pressure gradi-ent. At higher levels of power P, there is a bifurcation
from the stable H-mode to a limit cycle solution thatcan be identied with the ELM. The frequency of thecycles rst decreases with P, as is characteristic of
f
ELMfor type III ELMs, but then fELMbegins to
increase with PforP>1:6Pthbecause there is a
need to transport more energy out of the system bymeans of the ELMs.
2.6.4. Extrapolation of edge MHD stability results
and models to ITER
Although the ideal and resistive MHD insta-
bility theories described above and the associatedrespective correlation of type I and type III ELMs
with ideal and resistive edge instability provide a
modestly satisfactory phenomenological and evensemi-quantitative description of ELM characteristics(especially the power scaling) in present tokamaks,present ELM and/or L{H transition theories are notyet mature enough to provide a denitive predic-tion for ITER ELM types and magnitudes. Accord-ingly, ITER ELM projections have mainly reliedupon empirical predictions of edge plasma character-istics (n{Tedge space operation domain, see Chap-
ter 4 and also Section 3 below) and the correspond-
ing ELM characteristics. These empirical projectionssuggest that ITER will operate in a relatively highdensity ( 810
19m−3), high temperature ( 4k e V )
edge regime that is simultaneously close to the oper-ational domains wherein type I and type III ELMscan be expected.
Figure 33, reproduced from Chapter 4, shows one
example of how the edge operational space is pro-jected to extrapolate to ITER. However, present edgeoperational space data and ELM theories are notmature enough to denitively predict the exact out-come with regard to ITER ELM type and magnitude,and there are ongoing discussions as to what ampli-
tude and frequency of ELMs can be expected and
exactly what the eect of such ELMs (and the result-
ing high edge densities) on global connement willbe. The plasma edge characteristic issues that areinvolved are also closely related to the need for ITERto operate with high plasma densities (ideally slightlyabove the Greenwald limit, see Section 3.3) with ade-quate energy connement and acceptable ELM typeand magnitude. Overall resolution of these mattersfor ITER (and for future reactors) is presently a mat-
ter of ongoing discussion that encompasses the full
range of eects that ELMs and the plasma edge char-acteristics are found to have on plasma performanceand achievable density.
0246
02468 1 0
nped (1019 m-3)Ideal MHD
unstableTped (keV)
  L - H
transitionELM-free
Type III ELMs Type I ELMs 
Radiation unstable (0.2% Ar)H-mode
L-modeType III ELM onsetBallooning onsetITER: B = 5.7 T, I = 21 MA, d = 0.25, Dped = 0.15 m
Figure 33. Plasma edge operational space diagram for
ITER. The projected ITER edge operation conditions ( n,
T) lie along the ideal MHD ballooning instability limit
contour in the upper right corner of the diagram, at n
81019m−3,T4 keV, in the region where type I ELMs
are present, and where type III ELMs and excessive edgeimpurity radiation losses are avoided.
In addition, there are uncertainties as to the
degree to which it will be possible to exceed theideal ballooning limit ( 
c= 1). Better understand-
ing of details of the respective MHD stability con-ditions and trigger mechanisms are central to bring-ing these discussions to a denitive conclusion. Morewidespread availability in present experiments ofedge density and temperature (and, ideally, currentdensity) diagnostic measurements with spatial andtemporal resolution sucient to accurately resolve
the pressure and safety factor proles in the edge
region will assist in reaching a conclusion.
There is also concern for ITER that type I ELMs
may produce excessive divertor target erosion and
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2303

--- Page 55 ---

ITER Physics Basis
the observation has been made that operation with
type II ELMs (as may be possible if the plasma
triangularity can be increased somewhat), rather
than type I ELMs, is desirable. Finally, having oneor more ‘independent’ ELM control means (e.g. edgelocalized RF heating or current drive, or externallyapplied edge RMPs or edge localized pellet injec-tion) available to control ELM type and parameters(e.g. reduce the magnitude of type I ELMs) is clearlydesirable for ITER and reactor tokamaks, where thepresent principal ‘ELM control’ means { varying the
auxiliary power level and/or changing the plasma
shape { will not be available or are incompatiblewith other plasma operation requirements. Here, asnoted above, there have been some successes withindependent means in present experiments in beingable to modify ELM types or characteristics, butdenitive demonstration of an ITER/reactor rele-vant ELM optimization and control strategy remainsas a future task for the tokamak research community.
2.7. MHD stability of high internal
inductance and reverse shear ‘advancedperformance’ plasma congurations
Steady state operation sustained by non-inductive
means (heating and/or current drive plus boot-strap current) is an important and arguably essen-tial requirement for the practical implementation ofa fusion power reactor. The attainment of steadystate operation is specied as an ultimate objectivefor ITER. Present understanding of the prospectsfor such operation in ITER has identied three keyenabling requirements: enhanced connement (seeChapter 2); enhanced MHD stability and normal-
ized beta (addressed here); and plasma prole con-
trol by non-inductive means (see Chapters 6 and 8).The attainment of at least partial combinationsof these enabling requirements in present tokamakexperiments has come to be termed achievementof ‘advanced tokamak performance’, with the term‘advanced’ typically denoting improvement relativeto ‘standard’ tokamak performance, as quantied rel-ative to ‘standard’ H-mode connement (i.e. H
H=
1, see Chapter 2) and the ideal MHD beta limit
N;max =max(%)a(m)B(T)=I(MA) 3:5
(see Section 2.1). A discussion of the physics
considerations that apply to advanced tokamakperformance and a comprehensive summary ofrecent experimental and theoretical work on variousadvanced tokamak operation modes is given in [188].For steady state operation in ITER at full fusion
power, studies of possible operation modes [189] (see
also Chapters 8 and 9) show that it will be necessary
to simultaneously achieve a certain degree of bothenhanced connement and enhanced 
Nin plasma
operation modes that are consistent with the heat-ing, current drive and prole control means that canbe implemented in ITER. Projected current driveeciencies mandate operation with 80% bootstrap
current fraction. The need to have high plasma den-sity (mandated by the fusion power requirement)
also means advanced performance in ITER must
be compatible with nearly equilibrated electron andion temperatures. These operational matters and therelated physics basis issues are addressed in Chap-ters 8 and 9.
This Section addresses the physics basis aspects
of MHD stability and beta limit enhancement, but,
even here, it is dicult to fully isolate these MHDissues from the close interaction that exists amongthe attainment of enhanced connement, the attain-ment of enhanced MHD stability, and the use of non-inductive means to establish and control the plasmapressure and current proles. Modication of the‘natural’ tokamak current prole relative to the pro-le, which self-consistently develops in ‘standard’ L-mode or H-mode plasmas, appears to be a central
enabling aspect for the attainment of advanced per-
formance and (sometimes) enhanced MHD stability,and, hence, this Section focuses on the requirementsfor current prole modication and the MHD stabil-ity and beta limit eects of this modication.
2.7.1. Eects of current prole modication
Modications of the current prole shape have
been used for many years to increase the achiev-
able normalized beta of tokamaks. The most suc-
cessful eorts have been those in which the currentprole peaking is increased (resulting in increaseddimensionless internal inductance, l
i) [190{193] or
those in which the normally positive magnetic shears=(r=q)(dq=dr) is reversed in the central region of
the plasma [194{201]. The term high- l
ihas come to
be used to describe plasma operation with increasedcurrent peaking. The terms negative central shear
(NCS) or reversed central shear (RCS), or, sim-
ply, reversed shear (RS), have come to be some-what interchangeably used to describe plasmas withreversed central shear. There is no scientic distinc-tion among these various terms: in what follows weuse reversed shear. The term enhanced reverse shear
2304
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 56 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
(ERS) has also been used to describe the enhance-
ment of connement attributable to the formation
of an ITB that is obtained when centrally local-
ized neutral beam or other heating is applied toa plasma with preexisting RS [202]. Such heatinginduced transport barrier connement enhancementsgo beyond the direct eect of shear reversal, butshear reversal or at least weak central shear appearsto be a necessary condition for their occurrence (seeChapter 2, Section 3.4). The ‘enhanced’ nomencla-ture is not always consistently used in the literature,
and in some cases plasma operation modes with pro-
nounced ITBs are described simply as RS plasmas.
Figure 34 shows representative magnetic and
kinetic proles for an RS plasma produced by currentramping in the DIII-D tokamak. For RS plasmas,the central form of the qprole, and the correspond-
ing requirement for a hollow current prole, are thekey considerations. The radius of the reversal regionand degree of shear reversal { strong, weak, marginal(nearly constant q){c a nv a r y .
We note here, parenthetically, that the recent
increased availability of diagnostics (Faraday rota-tion or motional Stark eect (MSE) spectroscopy)that allow direct measurement of the current density
or safety factor proles (see Chapter 7) has proved
instrumental in elucidating the role that current andshear prole modications play in enhancing plasmaperformance and in correlating the eects of shearreversal (and heating and current and momentumdrive inputs) with the formation of ITBs. Routineuse of current prole/safety factor diagnostics hasbecome essential for the quantitative study of high-l
iand RS plasmas. A similar diagnostic requirement
can be projected for ITER and for future reactor
tokamaks predicated upon RS/ERS operation. It is
also likely that some of the plasmas obtained inearly short pulse ‘beta limit’ exploration dischargeswith rising current waveforms had some degree ofshear reversal that went unrecognized owing to thelack of explicit central safety factor prole data (see,for example, the high- DIII-D plasmas described
in [203], where marginal evidence, derived from mag-netic (equilibrium) reconstruction data for reverse
shear, is shown).
Experiments with transient modications of the
current prole shape, primarily using current ramps
but also using pellets or neutral beams, have demon-strated that good or enhanced connement can beobtained in both high- l
iand reversed shear plasmas.
In particular, transport coecients approaching neo-classical values have been obtained in the centralreversed shear region of RS plasmas (see Chapter 2,
Section 3.4).
Reversed shear proles require a non-monotonic
current prole (o-axis peaking of the current den-
sity). It has been demonstrated experimentally in
Tore-Supra [194, 195] and JT-60U [196, 197] thatreversed magnetic shear can be maintained and con-trolled by using lower hybrid wave current drive(LHCD). Strongly reversed magnetic shear, evenstronger than that formed by NBI heating duringcurrent ramp-up, with a large region of shear rever-sal was formed by LHCD alone in Tore-Supra [195](Fig. 35). A strong gradient was found in the elec-
tron temperature prole, suggesting improvement of
connement within the RS region. Attainable 
N
in this discharge was comparable to that of other
inductively created (by ramping) reversed shear dis-charges.
Enhanced connement and/or stability attributed
to reversed shear have been obtained in plasmas withnear circular cross-sections (e.g. TFTR and Tore-Supra); moderate elongation, moderate triangularitycross-sections (JT-60U and JET); and high elonga-tion, high triangularity cross-sections (DIII-D). TheTFTR and Tore-Supra plasmas are limiter dened;
the others are divertor dened, with both single null
(JET and JT-60U) and double null geometries (DIII-D). The reversed shear region, not the plasma shape,is the essential enabling factor.
These observations show the importance and
potential performance benets { in both connementand MHD stability { of control of the plasma cur-rent and safety factor proles. Both requirements arenecessary for the achievement of full fusion powerin ITER and the achievement of satisfactory powerdensities in a reactor that is based upon foresee-able superconducting magnet technology. The bal-
ance of this Section focuses on the MHD stability
aspects of the two candidate ‘advanced performance’plasma operation modes that are relevant to ITER.How these modes may extrapolate to ITER is brieﬂyaddressed at the conclusion of this Section. Here wenote that since the physics database for advancedperformance tokamaks is still very much in a stateof development, we discuss the identication andphysics basis of such modes for ITER in terms of
candidates rather than as already determined selec-
tions. As will be presented in Chapter 9, the demon-stration of reactor relevant ‘advanced performance’steady state operation in a DT burning tokamak willarguably be a ‘rst of a kind’ opportunity (and task)for an ITER class experiment.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2305

--- Page 57 ---

ITER Physics Basis
R (m)R (m)0.9 1.9 2.4 1.4
0.9 1.9 2.4 1.4BZ (T)0.2
-0.6-0.4-0.20.00.00.51.01.5
-1.5-1.0-0.5Limiter
DivertorTi (keV)
ne (1019 m-3) 
Te (keV)10
10
5
01520
05
Vn0.5(Normalized radius)Pressure (MPa)0.15
0.10
0.00.05
00.2 0.4 0.8 0.6 1.0jtor (MA/m2)
qtotal
fast ions
10
5
0012
Z (m)
reverse shearMSE data (B z)
Plasma poloidal field 
(from MSE data)
Figure 34. Plasma magnetic conguration reconstruction and prole data for a
NBI heated reversed shear plasma in DIII-D. The toroidal current density ( jtor)a n d
safety factor ( q) prole data are derived in this case from MSE measurements of the
in-plasma vertical ( Z) component of the poloidal magnetic eld B. The radius of the
reverse shear region (shaded) is about half of the minor radius. The pressure gradientsteepens within the shear reversal radius. Data reproduced from Ref. [200].
2.7.2. High- liplasmas
Experiments in DIII-D, JT-60U and TFTR have
demonstrated that increased internal inductance
results in a higher Nlimit, and that this enhanced
Nis generally obtained while maintaining H-mode
or better levels of connement. Figure 36 showsthe procedure typically used to obtain high- l
iplas-
mas in these tokamaks: the current of a well equili-brated ‘standard’ discharge with an edge qof about
3 (usually NBI heated to increase the plasma tem-perature and thus extend the duration of the tran-sient high-l
iphase) is ramped down rapidly, result-
ing in on-axis peaking of the remaining current and
a transient increase in internal inductance abovethe ‘steady state’ value that is eventually reachedwhen the current prole re-equilibrates. Similar tran-sient increases in l
ican also be obtained by a rapid
2306 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 58 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
0 1.0 0.5
Normalized radius0 1.0 0.5
Normalized radius2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
04
3
2
1Safety factor (q y)
t = 14 s (Ohmic)
t = 16.8 s (2.5 MW LH)t = 15.6 s (2.5 MW LH)
shear reversalTe (keV) and HXR (a. u.)Hard X ray emission
(from LH absorption)Te (17 s)
Te (14 s)
shear reversal
Figure 35. LHCD shear reversal in Tore-Supra ( R=2:4m ,a=0:72 m (circular cross-section),
B=1:3T ,ne0=31019m−3). A LHCD sustained quasi-steady state RS region develops within 3 s of
application of 2.5 MW of 3.7 GHz LHCD. The HXR data show the approximate LH power depositionprole. Approximately half of the 0 :4 MA plasma current is LH driven. Safety factor proles are inferred
from Faraday rotation measurements of the in-plasma eld direction. Data reproduced from Ref. [195].
increase in the plasma elongation [193] or by expand-
ing the plasma minor radius [202, 204]. Since thetime-scale for current prole relaxation is typicallylonger than the energy connement time, it is pos-sible to make energy connement measurements as
l
iand the current prole vary during the relaxation
period.
Figure 36 shows current proles at three points in
a ramp-down L-mode discharge: the highest induc-tance prole transiently has some reverse currentat the inboard (small- R) edge of the plasma. The
pre-ramp and ‘steady state’ post-ramp proles haveessentially zero edge current density.
Figure 37 shows representative connement data
obtained in DIII-D experiments in which a cur-r e n tr a m p - d o w no ra ne l o n g a t i o ni n c r e a s ei su s e dto increase l
i. Enhanced connement is obtained for
both L-mode and H-mode plasmas. The enhance-
ment increases with increasing liand current peak-
ing. High elongation, high- liH-mode plasmas achieve
signicant ( 1.5 times) connement enhancement
relative to ‘standard’ (1 :0li1:2) H-mode
plasmas.
On DIII-D, N= 6 has been transiently reached
in high-liplasmas produced by current ramp-down[193]. Figure 38 shows that in these L-mode plas-
mas, the attainable Nincreases with increasing li
and approaches the corresponding ideal MHD bal-
looning beta limit. The peak (stably achieved) val-ues of
Nare also close to the N=4liempirical
beta limit scaling (see Section 2.1). At the highest
inductance, the connement enhancement in L-mode(now evaluated relative to ITER89P L-mode energyconnement scaling) is approximately 2: i.e. a high- l
i
L-mode provides connement equal to a normal- liH-
mode of equal current. This 2 times enhancement ofL-mode connement at high- l
ito ‘normal’ H-mode
levels can also be seen explicitly in Fig. 37.
On TFTR, Nas high as 4.9 with H89Pfactors
of 4 have been transiently reached, and DT fusionpowers of up to 8.7 MW (cf. 10.7 MW in a maximumperformance standard- l
i‘supershot’) have been pro-
duced in discharges wherein li=1:5 is transiently
obtained by radial expansion of the plasma minor
radius [204]. In these TFTR high- liplasmas,q(0) is
typically well below unity, but, as in TFTR super-shots, sawteeth are suppressed at high NBI powersowing to fast ion kinetic stabilization eects (see[204] and Section 2.2.). The stability of these plas-mas at high 
Nis in conﬂict with ideal MHD theory
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2307

--- Page 59 ---

ITER Physics Basis
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 1.01.2 2.40.01.02.0 (li @ 1.1)Ramp start
(li @ 2)Ramp end
(li @ 1.4)"Steady state"
Major radius (m)Toroidal current density (MA/m2)
2.01.02.0
0.0
2.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 5.0 4.5Ramp start Ramp end "Steady state"
Time (s)Ip (MA)
li
Figure 36. Plasma current and liwaveforms for a representative DIII-D current ramp-down experi-
ment. Current density proles obtained from equilibrium reconstructions supplemented with MSE data
are shown in the right hand panel. Data reproduced from Ref. [193].
Internal inductance ( li)1.5 1.0 0.50.01.51.01.52.0
2.0 2.5Normalized confinement H H (DIII-D/JET scaling basis)
Current ramp (down)Current ramp (down)Current ramp (down)Elongation ramp (up)
k = 1.2k = 2.1
k = 1.7k = 1.7
L-modeH-mode
Figure 37. Energy connement versus liin DIII-D.
The normalization basis used here is the so-called DIII-D/JET empirical scaling, which accurately describesH-mode connement in both experiments. Reproducedfrom Ref. [193] with multiple data indicated by shadeddomains (typical data shown to indicate error bars).
predictions for onset of the n=1 ,m=1i n t e r n a l
kink instability, which is expected (in the absence offast ion stabilization) for q(0)<1. However, with the
simple artice of raising q(0) above unity, ideal MHD
stability calculations of the resulting ‘equivalent’plasmas are then in reasonable agreement with theexperimentally observed disruptive beta limits (seeSections 2.1 and 2.2). Figure 39 shows 
N{lidata for
representative TFTR high- lihigh-pand standardbN = 4li
0.5046
28
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5Ballooning 
bN limit
HITER89P23
1
045
Normalized confinement (H ITER89P)Normalized beta ( bN)
bN
Internal inductance ( li)
Figure 38. Energy connement (relative to ITER89P
scaling) and peak Nin DIII-D L-mode current ramp-
down plasmas. Explicitly calculated ideal MHD balloon-ing limits for various l
iare also shown. Experimental
and MHD stability data from Ref. [6] with the N=4li
empirical scaling added here for comparison.
‘supershot’ discharges. As Fig. 39 demonstrates, the
maximumNattained in current ramp-down plas-
mas appears to scale approximately linearly with
internal inductance, but lies below the empirical
N=4liideal MHD stability limit (see Section 2.1).
Note also that these high pplasmas, both static
and with current ramp-down, reach internal induc-tances that are approximately twice as large as thoseobtained in the DIII-D experiments cited above.
2308
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 60 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Analysis of the MHD stability of a representative
TFTR current ramp-down discharge (Fig. 40) shows
that the plasma is marginally unstable to high- nbal-
looning modes in the outer ﬂux surfaces, and balloon-ing instability is identied in [190] to be the likelycause for the beta saturation and/or subsequent dis-ruption that limits attainable performance in theseplasmas. Similar beta limiting ballooning instabilityin the outer region is observed in TFTR supershotplasmas (see Section 2.1). The MHD stability anal-ysis of the DIII-D high- l
iL-mode plasmas described
above also identies ideal ballooning as the likely N
limiting instability.
bN = 2 li
Ip ramp
endsIp constantIp rampdown ( ﬂ)
Ip rampdown ( ﬂ)Ip constantHigh bp:
Supershots:Ip(ﬂ), disruption
Normalized internal inductance  (li)Normalized beta  (bN)
bN = 4 li
Beams offIp = 0.85 ﬁ 0.4 MA
Ip = 1.0 ﬁ 0.7 MA
1 0012345
2 3 45 6Ip ramp
 starts
Figure 39. Peak normalized (from diamagnetic mea-
surements, fast ion pressure included) as a function of
plasma internal inductance lias obtained in TFTR NBI
heated plasmas. N{litrajectories for two current ramp-
down cases are shown. The highest Ncase ends in
disruption. The symbol coded data show the peak N
values reached (without disruption) in various current
ramp-down and constant current cases. Data for ‘stan-dard’ TFTR supershot plasmas are also shown. Theramp-down plasmas transiently achieve higher 
Nand
li. Reproduced from Ref. [190], with N=4liand 2li
empirical scalings added.
Table 4 summarizes the instability data reported
in high-liexperiments, mostly with current ramp-
down, in TFTR, DIII-D, JT-60U and Tore-Supra.A theoretical ‘steady state’ reactor relevant high- l
i
example case with 60% bootstrap current reported
in [188] is also included. The data in the Table showthat
N4{5 can normally be obtained (the Tore-
Supra experiments did not explicitly explore thehigh-and
Nregime), albeit with edge qvalues
of8. The corresponding relative gure of merit forFirst stable
regionSecond stable 
region
Unstable 
regionTFTR  shot 46470
-dp/dyPressure gradientPressure gradient (MPa/W)
001
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.023456
Normalized minor radius
Figure 40. High-nballooning stability analysis for a
TFTR current ramp-down plasma (0 :85!0:4M A ) .
The measured pressure gradient in the outer half of theplasma is found to be close to the calculated rst stableregion pressure gradient limit (rst stability boundary).
achievable total (=NI=aB N=q) is typically
about 0.6. The DIII-D L-mode data are an excep-
tion: theN=qattained at the maximum litransient
phase that follows the completion of the ramp-downreaches 0.9 (note, however, in Fig. 36 that there issome edge current reversal at this point), and thevalue of
N=qobtained in the ‘steady state’ li=1:4
phase reaches 0.7.
The values of N=q0:6 typically achieved in
the high-liexperiments at q=8c a nb ec o m p a r e d
to the value of N=q1:2 that can be obtained
in ‘standard- li’ plasmas at q= 3 at the ideal MHD
beta limit of N=3:5. Explicit estimates of the ideal
MHD beta limit in ITER H-mode plasmas show that
N= 3 can be expected (see Section 2.1 and [15]):
the corresponding ‘standard- li’ gure of merit for
ITER or a similar reactor tokamak is N=q=1 .
As noted in Table 4, the actual Nneeded for rated
fusion power in ITER is about 70% of the ideal MHDlimit, so positive shear operation in ITER has 45%
‘headroom’, in so far as ideal MHD stability is con-cerned.
2.7.2.1. Extrapolation of high- l
ioperation to ITER
The extrapolation of steady state high- liplasma
operation to a reactor and to ITER is somewhatproblematic. There are two diculties. The rst is
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2309

--- Page 61 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Table 4. Experimental and theoretical stability data for high- liplasmas
q
Experiment or model ( q95orqlim)liN N=q
DIII-D (transient, at max li) [193] 7 2.3 6.3 0.9
DIII-D (‘steady state’) [193] 7 1.4 4.8 0.7
JT-60U [192] 8 2.5 4.7 0.5
TFTR [190] 8 2.5 4.7 0.6
Tore-Supra (LHCD, ss) [194]82 . 8 0 . 70.1
ITER (theoretical, positive shear 3.0 0.9 3 1
H-mode proles) [15] (Section 2.1) (cf. 2.2 for (cf. 0.73
Pfus=1:5 GW) needed)
Model (q=8 ,fbs= 60%) [188] 8 1.2 4 0.5
The feasibility of higher Noperation was not explored in these experiments.
that given reasonable limits on minimum on-axis q
(=q(0)), high-liplasmas will have high edge qand,
hence, low(N=q). This low tends to limit the
fusion power attainable at a given toroidal eld. The
tendency for high- liplasmas to yield N=qvalues
that are appreciably lower than ‘standard- li’p l a s -
mas withq3 is evident in Table 4. Generic projec-
tions (see, for example, the high- limode presented
in [188]) suggest that a reactor relevant steady statehigh-l
imode based on li1:2 will have an eective
plasma edge q8 and relatively low plasma cur-
rent (8 M Ai nI T E R ) .I fs u c hp l a s m a sc a nr e a c h
the ideal MHD beta limit ( N=4li5), the cor-
responding will be about 2.5%. While the exact
fusion power capability at this beta will depend onthe pressure proles and plasma impurity content,the achievement of full fusion power in high- l
iplas-
mas in ITER with adequate beta limit headroomappears to be dicult.
The second diculty in extrapolating high- l
ioper-
ation to steady state ITER operation arises because
the bootstrap current prole in such plasmas is notwell aligned with the centrally peaked current proleneeded for the high- l
imode. This misalignment is
inherent owing to the qdependence of the bootstrap
current density ( jbsq(dp=dr )): there is too little
bootstrap current near the plasma axis and too muchnear the edge. Auxiliary current drive is, therefore,required on-axis and negative current drive is needed
at the plasma edge. These factors reduce the global
current drive eciency (utilization of current drivepower) and, hence, reduce attainable Q(fusion power
gain). However, the practicality of achieving high- l
i
proles on a steady state basis in an ITER plasma
with adequate eciency remains to be studied indetail, as does the possible benet of high- lioper-
ation in achieving a more centrally peaked pressureprole (which increases the overall fusion reactivity).The question of how low q(0) can be maintained
in a steady state current drive sustained heated
plasma (where strong alpha particle stabilization ofthe internal sawtooth reconnection is expected, seeSection 2.2) also requires further study. If low q(0)
and strong axial pressure peaking prove possiblein high-l
iITER plasmas, then such operation may
become more attractive for ITER and reactors.
Finally, with regard to utilization of the high- li
mode in ITER, it is likely that the same type of
transient current ramping (and, possibly, also shaperamping) studies that are conducted in presentexperiments can be repeated in ITER with auxiliary
heated and ignited or high- Qburning plasmas. The
current prole relaxation times for such plasmasapproach 500 s, so ‘sustained pulse’ explorations ofthe eect of current prole peaking on time-scalesmuch longer than the corresponding energy andparticle connement times appear possible. Whilethe plasma current and conguration control feasi-bility (PF coil voltage and power requirements) ofcurrent and possibly shape ramping experiments in
ITER remain to be studied in detail, the nominal
PF capacity is likely to be sucient to conduct avariety of experiments with inductive current prolemodication.
2.7.3. Reversed shear plasmas
Plasmas with hollow current proles (i.e. with
reversed shear) are predicted and observed to haveenhanced stability and connement under some cir-
2310
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 62 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
cumstances. Plasmas with reversed shear are also
theoretically predicted to have the additional attrac-
tive feature that the alignment of the bootstrap
current with the desired current prole shape isrelatively good, allowing high bootstrap fraction[20,205,206]. Reversed shear plasmas have been tran-siently created { by current and/or shape ramping{ on the TFTR, DIII-D, JT-60U, JET and othertokamaks to allow investigation of their stabilityand connement characteristics. Reduced transportof one type or another has been frequently observed.
However, the improvements in MHD stability are
mixed. On TFTR, JET and JT-60U the highest 
N
achieved in reversed shear operation is 2, not signif-
icantly better than that obtained in other high per-formance operational regimes. Higher 
N(N4:5)
withH89P3:5 [207] has been reached transiently
on DIII-D with broader pressure proles and weaknegative central shear. Some of the highest per-formance (fusion reactivity) shots in DIII-D are insuch reversed shear plasmas, and record DD neutron
yields and equivalent Q
DTare achieved (albeit with
N2) in JT-60U RS plasmas with a large minor
radius ITB (see below).
The maximum that can be obtained in RS
plasmas is found to be limited by both ideal andresistive MHD instabilities. On TFTR, while thereversed shear plasma core is found { as predicted{ to be ideal MHD stable, in the outer, normal
shear region, ideal MHD instability is experimentally
found to limit global . Because of this limitation,
TFTR RS plasmas did not provide improved perfor-mance over normal ‘supershot’ operation [202,208].The beta limiting instability on TFTR is driven bythe high pressure gradient in a ‘transport barrier’region that develops in the low shear region nearq
min. The measured mode growth time of 0.1{1 ms
shows that the instability is the result of ideal MHD.
The instability is modelled as an n= 1 ‘infernal’ kink
mode [209,210], possibly coupled in some instancesto a toroidally localized ballooning mode [210] in thelow and normal shear region. The so-called infer-nal mode instability, which is localized in the regionof high pressure gradient, combines both kink (low-n) and ballooning (high- n) displacements (hence the
description of the mode as being ‘infernal’: the entirenspectrum becomes unstable).
With these MHD stability considerations taken
into account, good agreement is found between theexperimental TFTR RS beta limits and the theo-retical predictions for instability onset. The infernalmode becomes unstable when q
minapproaches a lowinteger value, generally 2. Comparisons of the pre-
dicted mode structure agree well with experimental
measurements (Fig. 41).
In the TFTR experiments, the anticipated im-
provements in stability of reversed shear plasmas,
compared to those with normal (monotonic) shear,
were not achieved because of the strong couplingbetween the magnetic conguration and the plasmatransport. Further improvement in the performanceof RS plasmas would have required active control ofboth the pressure and the current proles. The inter-action between the transport and stability aspects ofthese TFTR plasmas and the diculties in obtaininga net improvement in plasma performance relative to‘standard’ positive shear operation illustrate some of
the challenges and present uncertainties that apply
to the extrapolation of such modes to future exper-iments, where, among other uncertainties, how con-nement enhancement will extrapolate to a reactorscale device is not completely clear.
Mode radial displacement (cm)
Major radius (m)Measured 
(from Mirnov B q)~
Measured 
(ECE)PEST
Magnetic axis (width indicates uncertainty)012
2345
2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4q(r)Safety factor (from MSE)
Figure 41. Comparison of calculated (from the PEST
stability code) and measured radial displacements for then= 1 ‘infernal mode’ MHD precursor that precedes dis-
ruption in TFTR RS plasmas. The infernal mode is local-
ized near the q
minradius and combines kink and bal-
looning instability features. The precursor growth ratesare commensurate with ideal MHD. Data taken fromRef. [208].
The onset of MHD instability in reverse shear dis-
charges in present experiments { wherein heatingpower is continuously applied and the plasma beta orneutron yield rises in a near linear manner { typically
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2311

--- Page 63 ---

ITER Physics Basis
results in disruption that occurs near the ideal MHD
beta limit. Immediately prior to the disruption, a
rapidly growing ( γ−10:1{0.5 ms)n= 1 magnetic
precursor is observed, and, as is explained above,the onset of the disruption is ascribed in TFTR toan infernal mode that combines the features of kinkand ballooning instabilities. Similar mixed kink bal-looning mode instabilities are found to limit JT-60URS/ITB beta (see below).
In high performance RS experiments, the plasma
current quench that follows ideal MHD instabilityonset is often very rapid and reverse shear disrup-tions are typically among the fastest or hardest dis-
ruptions (in terms of current quench rate) observed
in a given tokamak (see, for example, [211]), thefollowing discussion of the disruption characteristicsof other reverse shear experiments below and alsoChapter 8).
Slower growing non-ideal MHD modes with sat-
urated amplitudes are also possible in reverse shearplasmas. In the TFTR RS experiments, neoclassi-cal island bootstrap current eects (see Section 2.3)are predicted to be stabilizing for tearing modes inthe reverse shear region. This prediction is found tobe consistent with experimental observations. Tear-
ing modes with size and growth rate consistent with
neoclassical island tearing mode theory have beenobserved in the high- phase in the normal shear
region of the plasma. However, islands have not beenobserved in the reverse shear region of these plasmas.In the low-phases before and after high power neu-
tral beam heating, double tearing modes have beencommonly observed when q
minpasses through low
integer rational surfaces. When qminpasses through
2, the tearing modes can cause o-axis sawteeth
with varying degrees of magnetic reconnection [212].
Whenqminpasses through higher rational numbers,
such as 3 or 4, double tearing modes that can triggermajor disruptions have been detected with the fastelectron temperature prole diagnostics.
The stability of low shear and reversed shear
regimes to fusion alpha driven instabilities has beeninvestigated on TFTR [213]. Theoretical calculationspredict that TAE modes in low or weakly reversedshear plasmas will have reduced stability, and this isconsistent with the experimental observations. Alpha
driven TAE modes have been observed in weak shear
p l a s m a so nT F T Rw i t ha 
threshold that is consis-
tent with theoretical estimates. The levels in other
TFTR supershot, high- lior reversed shear experi-
ments were theoretically and experimentally belowthe threshold of excitation for TAE activity. For JT-60U, experiments where a strong internal transport
barrier (ITB) is formed in the negative shear dis-
charge nd no TAE instability. Stability analyses
with the NOVA-K code predicts that TAE modesare stable in these circumstances owing to a lack ofgap alignment [214].
Various MHD ﬂuctuations including resistive
modes and ideal modes are observed in JT-60U RSdischarges [215]. Proles for a typical high perfor-mance (high stored energy and DD neutron yield)discharge are shown in Fig. 42 [217]. In these dis-charges, the minor radius of the reversed shear regionis relatively large ( r=a0:6) and a narrow ITB
with very pronounced energy and particle conne-ment eects develops. Both resistive and ideal MHDactivity are observed in these discharges. Resistive
modes, which are observed continuously, can be clas-
sied by their localization in the minor radius: eitherat the inside or outside of the ITB or near theplasma surface. Resistive modes localized near theITB are observed when the pressure gradient and 
N
are large enough and when qminis between integer
values. Fluctuations with and without in{out asym-metry are observed in electron temperatures mea-sured by ECE. Here ‘in’ means within the ITB, and
‘out’ means outside the ITB (at larger r=a). Resistive
modes without in{out asymmetry seem to be doubletearing modes, while the origin of the resistive modeslocalized near the ITB with in{out asymmetry hasnot yet been identied.
Reversed shear discharges in JT-60U terminate
with hard disruptions even for low 
N. The disrup-
tions occur
(1) with ideal MHD instability growth time when
qmin4o r3;
(2) when the surface qis close to integer values
(suggesting the eect of external kink modes);
and
(3) with mode locking near the plasma surface.
For discharges with qmin2, a hard beta/con-
nement collapse that leads to disruption occursat
N2. Before the beta collapse begins, pre-
cursor oscillations in the electron temperature are
observed. These oscillations, which are localized in
the ITB region, grow on a resistive MHD insta-bility time-scale that is longer than 1.5 ms. Thebeta/connement collapse that follows the growth ofthese resistive modes then develops explosively fromthe ITB region on the low eld side with a growth
2312
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 64 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Reverse shearReverse shear
ITBITB
0 1.00.80.60.40.2
0246
001020510
0
1.00.80.60.40.20 1.00.80.60.40.2Ti
TeneSafety factor (q y)
Normalized radius r/aElectron density (10 19 m-3) Temperature (keV)
E27969E27969E27969
Figure 42. Density, temperature and safety factor pro-
les for a high performance JT-60U RS discharge withedge safety factor q
953:5 (from [217]). Note the rela-
tively large minor radius of the reversed shear region andthe pronounced eect of the ITB on plasma core energy
and particle connement.
time of the order of 10 s [216]. Ideal MHD stabil-
ity analysis shows that the experimental beta limit(
N2) atqmin2 is close to the theoretical calcu-
lated threshold for onset of ideal low- n(n=1 )c o u -
pled kink and ballooning modes [218]. Figure 43 illus-
trates the theoretically calculated mode structure,which combines low- minternal and ITB centred kink
components with a higher- mballooning component
localized outboard of the ITB radius. The propensityof high performance RS discharges to terminate dis-ruptively is attributed, in [217], to the prole wide
eect of the coupled low- mand high-mmodes. The
mode structure is similar to the structure of the infer-
nal mode that terminates high performance TFTRRS plasmas.
On DIII-D, the maximum achieved with nega-
tive central shear is found experimentally to dependon the shape of the pressure prole. Peaked pressureproles (L-mode edge) result in limiting 
N<2:5,
whereas with broader pressure proles { obtainedwith an H-mode edge { 
Nas high as 4{5 has been
reached transiently [211,219]. An H-mode transitionin JET is also found to broaden the pressure prole
and allow higher 
N, but DD fusion rate is unaf-
fected or declines owing to a decrease in central iontemperature. DIII-D plasmas with peaked pressureproles suer beta limit disruptions similar to thoseobserved in TFTR. The n= 1 disruption precur-
sor mode is localized near or just inside the q
min
radius. The broader pressure prole (H-mode edge)
plasmas are also limited by instabilities in the pos-itive shear region, but the precursors are localizedat the plasma edge. The stability limits follow the
linear scaling with internal inductance, l
i, seen in
normal shear plasmas. This is interpreted to meanthat current density at the plasma edge destabilizesthe plasma.
Table 5 summarizes stability related parameters
for RS plasmas. Theoretical ideal MHD stability pro-jections for candidate ITER and TPX (TokamakPhysics experiment) and DIII-D RS plasmas are alsoincluded. As the data in the Table show, with theexception of two RS plasmas obtained in DIII-D,the maximum normalized 
Nobtained falls in the
range 2{3, and the N=qgure of merit parameter
falls in the range 0.45{0.65. There are two exam-
ples of higher NorN=qobtained in DIII-D: high
N(=4.5) in a weak RS plasma conguration with
a broad pressure prole [207], and somewhat lower
N(=3.7) but higher N=q(=1.4) in what may be
a marginal RS plasma with high elongation and lowedge safety factor (=2.6) [203]. This latter plasma,which was not explicitly identied in [203] as beingan RS plasma, shows marginal evidence of shear
reversal in the magnetic equilibrium current prole
reconstruction data.
Figure 44 presents a summary of the experimen-
tal and theoretical (ideal MHD) 
NorNlimit data
from Table 1 (for high- liplasmas) and Table 5. None
of the experimental data in Table 5 attain the full N
orN=qpotential of the theoretically predicted ideal
MHD stability of the wall stabilized TPX low- qRS
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2313

--- Page 65 ---

ITER Physics Basis
563
4m = 2
0.40.4
0.20.2
00 01245
3
0.60.6
0.80.8
1.01.0
Normalized radius r = [(yo-y)/Dy]0.5Radius weighted displacement ( rxr)n = 1 Fourier 
components ( rxr)
m = 1reverse shear
qy
Safety factor (q y)
ITB
Figure 43. MHD stability analysis for the RS discharge
illustrated in Fig. 42. Calculations with the ERATO-J code show the presence of a coupled kink balloon-ing instability that is localized around the radial posi-tion of the ITB (note that the data plotted are for the
radius weighted mode displacement ,w h e r eis the
normalized radius derived from the ﬂux surface volume).Reproduced from Ref. [217] with RS and ITB indicationsadded.
plasma, and only the DIII-D high elongation/low- q
experimental data [203] attain the N=qpotential
predicted for the candidate ITER high- qRS plasma
proposed in [189]. The weak RS DIII-D plasma docu-mented in [207] has 
NandN=qperformance simi-
lar to the theoretical second stability VH mode DIII-D candidate plasma described in [206]. However, theshear proles for the experimental and theoreticalcases are rather dierent.
The conclusion that can be drawn from Table 5
and Fig. 44 is while there are presently a limited
number of experimental results that suggest thepotential for RS plasmas to provide ‘advanced’ reac-tor regime MHD stability and (with accompany-ing connement enhancement) nTperformance, in
most cases ideal MHD instability similar to the infer-nal mode MHD instability seen in TFTR and theneed to operate at reduced plasma current (higheredgeq) in order to achieve the RS conguration
act to limit attainable plasma andnTperfor-
mance to levels that are comparable or somewhat lessthan the plasma performance that can be obtainedin a given experiment in other ‘standard’ (non-RS)plasma operation modes (e.g. high- 
pmodes in JT-
60U or hot ion H-modes in JET).0 3 6 901234567
bN/q = 1.51.0
0.7
0.5DIII-D 
(li = 1.4)DIII-D 
(li = 2.3)
TFTR
JT-60U
Tore Supra
(LHCD, ss)Tore Supra
(LHCD, ss)High-li
Model
(fbs = 60%)
JET
JT-60U
JT-60UJT-60U
JT-60U
(LHCD, ss)TFTRDIII-D
(RS?)DIII-D
(WRS)
ITER
(PS, no wall)TPX (kink, w/wall)
TPX 
(kink, no wall)DIII-D
DIII-DDIII-D
(SS/VH)High li ExptRS Expt
Ideal MHD
Ideal MHD
ITER (1.5 GW)ITER
(RS, w/wall)TPX (ballooning)
Safety factor (q 95 or qlim)Normalized beta ( bN)
Figure 44. Normalized beta versus edge safety fac-
tor for high- liand RS plasma experiments (solid data
symbols). Theoretical ideal MHD stability limits for pro-posed ITER, TPX and reactor candidate plasmas are alsoshown (open symbols). Calculated beta limits for positiveshear (PS) and RS ITER cases are indicated. The corre-sponding
Nneeded in ITER for 1.5 GW fusion power is
also shown: the arrows indicate the N‘headroom’ rela-
tive to the ideal MHD limit.
While present assessments of the performance of
RS plasmas indicate that the full promise of RS
‘advanced MHD stability’ has not yet been achieved,
we note that there appears to be signicant potentialfor further optimization of RS performance in presentexperiments. In this regard, better capabilities fordirect current and/or pressure prole modicationby localized RF heating and current drive are onlynow becoming available, and it is clear that the inter-play among the degree of shear reversal, edge qand
the energy and pressure connement eects of both
I T B sa n dX T B s( i . e .a nL - m o d ev e r s u sa nH - m o d e
edge barrier) is critical to simultaneously optimizingthe MHD and connement performance of presentRS plasmas and for determining the basis for opti-mal RS MHD stability and overall performance infuture reactor RS plasmas.
2.7.4. Summary and extrapolation to ITER
Experiments in a variety of tokamaks with circu-
lar and elongated plasma cross-sections have demon-strated that modication of the current prole rel-ative to the prole obtained with ‘standard’ mag-netically equilibrated plasmas can result in enhanced
2314
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 66 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Table 5. Experimental and theoretical Nor MHD stability data for RS plasmas
Experiment or model q(q95orqlim)li N N=q
DIII-D (weak RS) [196] 6| 4 . 5 0 . 7 5
DIII-Da[104] 4.5 0.7 2.8a0.62
DIII-D (possibly RS)d[203] 2.6 0.91 3.7 1.42
DIII-De[219] 4.2 | 1.7 0.40
DIII-D (theoretical) [206] 6.5 0.64 5.7 0.88
(I=1:6M A ,=2:1)
JET [198] 4 (est.) | 2.6 (est.) 0.65
JT-60U [196] 4(qe5) | 2.1 0.53
JT-60U (LHCD, ss) [196] 6 ( qe=7:5) | 2.2 0.36
JT-60U [217]g3.5 | 2.2 0.6
JT-60U [220]f3.46 | 1.84 0.53
TFTR [199] 6.2 | 3.5 ( 
N) 0.5 (est.)
Tore-Supra (LHCD, ss) [195] 4.2 | 0.9 0.21ITER (theoretical, for +shear 3.0 0.9 3( c f .2.2 needed 1( c f .0 . 7 3
H-mode proles) (Section 2.1, [15]) for P
fus=1:5 GW) needed)
ITER (theoretical) [189] 5 | 5 (cf. 3.8 needed 1.0 (cf. 0.76
(I=1 2M A ,951:85,a2m ) f o r Pfus=1:5 GW) needed)
TPX (theoretical) [20] 3.5 | 1.9 (kink, wat1)b0.54
5.2 (kink,wat 1.3)c1.49
5.5 (ballooning) 1.57
a200 msN‘ﬂat-top’ at 1.3 times ideal MHD limit (wall at innity); RWM instability attributed to
edge rotation slowdown (see Section 2.4) ends high- phase.
bFor conducting wall at innity.
cFor conducting wall at r=a=1:3.
dWithIpramp, marginal RS indication in equilibrium reconstruction data, =2:34,= 11%, sustained
for50 ms.
eHighestQDD.
fHighestQDD.
gHighestQDD(multiple data).
connement, and, in some cases, also in high values of
achievableN. Benecial eects of both on-axis and
o-axis peaking are, respectively, seen in high- liand
RS plasmas. For high- liplasmas, the limit on achiev-
ableNis typically set by ideal MHD ballooning
instability that develops in the outer portions of theplasma, and, to date, the 
N=4liideal MHD beta
limit has been approached but not exceeded. Sincehigh-l
iplasmas inherently have higher edge safety
factors and lower total current (relative to normal- li
plasmas), the total ,a n dnTperformance of these
plasmas are typically not enhanced relative to the 
andnTattainable at edge safety factor q3{4.
For reverse shear plasmas, an ideal MHD stability
limit is also found to apply. Because RS plasmas typi-cally have low internal inductance, the correspondingideal
Nlimit is 2, and theNachieved in TFTR,JET and JT-60U plasmas has (so far) been limited
to 2{2.5 by the onset of resistive and/or ideal insta-
bility. In these plasmas, the limiting MHD mecha-nism is typically an ideal MHD infernal (or ‘infernallike’) mode that is localized near the q
minradius.
This mode combines internal kink and external bal-looning characteristics and leads to disruption. Themode displacement characteristics and 
Nthreshold
calculated from ideal MHD theory are in good agree-ment with experimental data. Slower growing resis-tive instabilities localized near the q
minregion can
also lead to prole changes that in turn can trigger
ideal MHD instability and disruption. There is alsoevidence in certain cases for the presence of resis-tive neoclassical island tearing modes in the positiveshear region of RS plasmas, and TAE instabilitieshave also been observed in TFTR RS plasmas.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2315

--- Page 67 ---

ITER Physics Basis
The principal exception to the N2 limit seen
in most RS experiments is obtained transiently in
DIII-D plasmas with weak reverse shear, wherein
Nas high as 4.5 has been achieved. These plas-
mas exceed the ideal MHD beta limit by factorsof1.3. In addition to the broad pressure proles
and weak shear reversal that these plasmas exhibit,plasma rotation enabled wall stabilization of externalkink modes appears to be a factor in being able toattain this level of ‘advanced’ MHD stability, whichapproaches the 
Npredicted to be obtainable on the
basis of ideal MHD stability with the eects of a con-
ducting wall located at r=a=1:3 taken into account.
Without wall stabilization, the same ideal MHD cal-culations predict that the beta limit will be 
N2.
To date, this N2 prediction seems to be borne
out by the majority of the RS beta limit data.
While the majority of present RS results are
obtained in a transient fashion by current and/or
shape ramping, comparable energy connement
enhancement eects are seen in LHCD sustained RSplasmas in Tore-Supra and JT-60U. In both cases,the MHD stable 
Nattained in LHCD sustained RS
plasmas is comparable to the Nattained by current
ramping.
Theoretical extrapolations of RS plasma opera-
tion to ITER suggest that N4a n dN=q0:8
will be needed for 1.5 GW steady state operation.
These requirements lie at the upper limit of thepresent RS MHD stability/beta limit experimentaldata (Fig. 44) and also require wall stabilization ofexternal kink instabilities. This requirement is poten-tially problematic for ITER and for a reactor owingto the low plasma rotation velocities expected in suchreactor scale plasmas. Whether or not the attain-able rotation velocity (typically a few per cent ofthe Alfv en velocity) will be sucient to provide wall
stabilization is presently a matter of debate (see
Section 2.4). If rotation sustained stabilization ofkink modes proves to be inadequate, as Section 2.4explains, active stabilization of the RWM by exter-nal coils will be needed for ‘advanced performance’steady state RS operation in ITER. In addition tothis possible requirement for active wall stabiliza-tion, the feasibility of generating and controlling thepressure and current proles by non-inductive means
in an alpha heating dominated plasma ( Q10) in
ITER or in a reactor remains to be studied. Here,better understanding of what proles are optimal(or at least adequate) to obtain the desired MHDstability and connement enhancements is urgentlyneeded.3. Density limits
The ability to operate with adequate energy con-
nement and MHD stability at plasma densities of
about 1020m−3is critical to the achievement of
adequate fusion power performance in reactor toka-maks based upon foreseeable superconducting mag-net technology. For ITER operation at 21 MA, aplasma density of 10
20m−3is about 15% above the
Greenwald density [221]
nGW(1020m−3)=I(MA)=a2(m):
As is now well known (see discussion of empir-
ical density limit scalings below), the densities
achieved in present day tokamaks are usually (butnot inevitably) constrained by n
maxnGW, and,
hence, achievable density normalized relative to nGW
has become a common gure of merit { equivalent to
N{ to quantify achievement in obtaining high den-
sity plasma operation. While there are operationalscenarios for ITER that produce full or nearly fullfusion power at or slightly below n
GW, it is clear that
for ITER, an ability to operate reliably in a density
regime with 0:8n=nGW1:2i sv e r yi m p o r -
tant (see Chapter 2). Accordingly, there has recentlybeen increased emphasis in tokamak research onobtaining a better understanding of the various pro-cesses that set limits on the achievable normal-ized density, especially in ‘reactor regime’ plasmaswith divertors, and adequate connement (ELMy H-mode or better). As will be presented below, recentimprovement in the understanding of the density lim-
its (there is more than one limit) is closely asso-
ciated with new understanding of the characteris-tics of the plasma edge region in H-mode. Therehas also been signicant recent progress in develop-ing quasi-steady state fuelling methods that facilitateobtaining stationary above Greenwald H-mode plas-mas with relatively undegraded connement qual-ity. However, identication of fuelling and/or edgeoptimization methods that can assure above Green-
wald H-mode operation with adequate connement
for reactor tokamaks remains as a topic of ongoingexperimental and theoretical study.
For ITER, two distinct density limiting processes
observed in present tokamaks are relevant. In present
auxiliary heated experiments, the highest normalized
densities are generally achieved in L-mode plasmasand are almost invariably limited by the occurrenceof a major disruption. This disruptive limit therefore
sets an upper bound on tokamak plasma density. Inaddition, H-mode experiments have shown that there
2316
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 68 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
is a limiting density, somewhat lower than the den-
sity at which disruptions occur, above which H-mode
connement cannot be sustained. This limit, which
causes a return to L-mode connement, represents aperformance limit. It is this density limit that is ulti-
mately important for ITER and reactor operation.The goal for ITER is to obtain operation modes inwhich this performance limit corresponds to densi-ties0:8n
GW,w i t h1:2nGWbeing a highly desirable
operational capability goal.
Figure 45 shows how the characteristic features
of the separate density limits and achievable opera-tional domains for L-mode and H-mode operation aremanifested in the ASDEX-Upgrade tokamak [222].Figure 45 shows the achievable domains for stableplasma operation, as depicted in terms of an  n
e{
Psepoperation parameter space, where  neis the line
average density and Psepis the power crossing the
separatrix. The latter power is inferred from mea-
surements of the heating power and the prole of
the radiated power. As Fig. 45 shows, in this space,there are well dened domains for L-mode and H-mode, the L-mode density limit exceeds the H-modelimit and is ultimately disruptive, and the limit forL-mode operation increases with power ﬂow acrossthe separatrix, whereas at high density, the H-modedensity limit is essentially power independent andan increase in density leads to a transition back to
L-mode. Figure 45 also shows that at moderate sepa-
ratrix power, the L-mode limit can (in this example)slightly exceed the Greenwald limit density, and themaximum density for H-mode operation is (again inthis example) somewhat less than both the disrup-tive L-mode limit and the Greenwald limit.
Figure 45 is presented here to illustrate the typical
features of the density limits and attainable oper-
ation regimes encountered in an H-mode capable
divertor tokamak. More detailed discussion of thephysics basis for the features depicted and discus-sion of the degree to which the various limits man-ifested in Fig. 45 are aected by plasma parame-ters and operation attributes (fuelling and heatingmeans, wall conditioning and so forth) are presentedin the following sub-sections.
3.1. Disruptive density limits and scalings
It has long been recognized that, for given plasma
parameters, there is a maximum density that can besustained, the limit being set by a disruptive insta-bility. Murakami et al. [223] showed that in ohmic
plasmas, the limiting line averaged density scaled asn   (10    m   )e20 -3H-modeL-modePsep (MW)
0246810
MARFE LimitL ﬁ H  threshold
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
Greenwald LimitDischarge Phase:
L-mode H-modeASDEX-Upgrade
Deuterium, 0.8 MA (q 95 = 4)
Figure 45. Plasma operation domains and density lim-
its in the ASDEX-Upgrade tokamak. Adapted from Fig. 8of Ref. [222]. The trajectories for several 0.8 MA dis-
charges with time varying density and/or heating power
are shown. The shaded region encompass the inferreddomain for the L-mode phase. The high density boundaryof this domain is disruptive. The ‘MARFE limit’ curvewithin the L-mode region shows the onset density atwhich the divertor MARFE expands into the bulk plasmaand full divertor detachment develops.
BT=R, while Fielding et al. [224] demonstrated that
the limiting density depended on the plasma currentand that the limit could be extended by conditioningthe torus wall by titanium gettering. These observa-tions gave rise to the use of the Hugill diagram (seeFig. 46), in which the tokamak existence space is
p l o t t e di nt e r m so f q
−1
cversus neBT=Ras a tool for
describing the accessible density range. It was quicklyrealized that the density limit could be described interms of a thermal imbalance between ohmic inputpower and (predominantly edge localized) impurityradiation losses [225{228].
Subsequent, more detailed studies on larger
devices (see, for example, [229{236]) conrmed themajor features associated with this general under-standing of the disruptive density limit. Increasingplasma density leads to a rise in the impurity radi-ation from the plasma edge region, which cools theedge and produces a steepening of the current pro-le in the vicinity of the q= 2 surface. This pro-
cess destabilizes n= 1 MHD modes (principally
those with m= 2), which grow and produce a
major disruption (see Section 4.1). The resultingplasma current termination, which is inevitably pre-ceded by a relatively slow rise in the radiated powerfraction and other indications of increasing radia-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2317

--- Page 69 ---

ITER Physics Basis
tion from the plasma edge, is commonly described
as a ‘density limit’ disruption. The rates of cur-
rent decay in density limit disruptions are typically
(but not always) slower than the rates of decayencountered in ‘beta limit’ disruptions that are initi-ated by the more rapidly growing instabilities asso-ciated with the ideal MHD beta limit (see Sec-tion 2.1).
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.00.3
0.2
0.1
0.00.40.50.6
0-10 MW
10-20 MWPower input:
OH
NBI
ICRH
Combinedqcyl-1OH/RF NBI Data for C:
Data for Be
Heating type:
neR/BT (1020 m-2 T-1)
Figure 46. Hugill diagram for JET limiter plasmas fol-
lowing introduction of beryllium evaporation and a beryl-lium limiter (see Ref. [237]). The points show densitiesnormalized by B
T=Rachieved in plasmas with various
forms of heating. The two dashed lines illustrate the den-sity limits in earlier OH/ICRF and NBI experiments witha mainly carbon rst wall. For a given q
cyl,t h el a r g e s t
values of the Murakami parameter after the introduc-tion of beryllium represent densities 30{50% beyond the
Greenwald density. The tendency for the normalized lim-
iting density to increase with power input is also shownin the data.
Other key features identied in the course of
these density limit experiments include the fact that
the limiting density should be identied with theedge rather than the line averaged density, sincethe radiated power can be written approximatelyas
P
RADfRADnen2
ZaRAD
wherefRAD(Te;Ze) describes the radiated power
as a function of TeandZe,neis the electron
density characteristic of the (edge localized) radiat-ing region, n
Zthe impurity content in the radiat-ing region, and  RADis the width of the radiat-
ing shell. This model was conrmed by comparisons
between gas and pellet fuelled plasmas, which showed
that the latter achieved signicantly (at least a fac-tor of 2) higher line averaged densities than the for-mer, but had similar edge densities at the disruptivelimit.
Support for the proposal that the density limit
was determined by the thermal imbalance between
input power and radiation losses came from exper-
iments in JET, showing that the edge density lim-ited scaled as P
0:5
IN[231], and from ASDEX, where
the density limit exhibited a P0:25{0:4
IN scaling [233].
Finally, the important role played by impurity radi-ation was emphasized by the increased density lim-its found in experiments in which the plasma impu-rity content was reduced by improved conditioning,either by beryllium evaporation (Keilhacker et al.
[237]) or boronization [233,235]. Both of these wall
conditioning methods reduce the plasma oxygen con-
tent substantially, and, hence, raise the density atwhich radiation losses become critical.
An attempt by Greenwald et al. to deduce a
generalized scaling for the (line averaged) densitylimit, based largely on data from limiter and X-point (largely L-mode) plasmas in Alcator-C, PBXand DIII-D, concluded that the density limit could
be described by  n
lim=Ip=a2, independent of the
additional heating power [221]. Moreover, it was pro-posed that the ultimate limit was set by a degrada-tion of particle connement. While some experimentshave been unable to exceed this ‘Greenwald density’(see, for example, [236]), other gas fuelled experi-ments have exceeded it by a factor of 50% or morefor certain operation parameters (see, for example,[222,237]), while demonstrating, simultaneously, an
explicit dependence on the additional heating power
and no degradation of particle connement. The RImode of TEXTOR [238] also achieves densities thatsomewhat exceed the Greenwald value.
3.2. Radiation and scrape o layer physics
Although the behaviour at the disruptive den-
sity limit follows the broadest prescriptions of radi-ation based models, the detailed behaviour as the
limit is approached is more complicated. As observed
initially in Alcator-C, the edge cooling associatedwith increasing radiation leads to the formationof a multifaceted asymmetric radiation from theedge (MARFE) [239]. This is a toroidally symmet-ric but poloidally localized region of cold high den-
2318
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 70 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
sity plasma, with intense impurity emission, that
is located at the plasma edge, usually on the high
toroidal eld side of the plasma. The formation of
the MARFE is accompanied by a rapid growth inthe global radiation fraction, and MARFEs can oftenraise the radiated power fraction to 100% with littlechange in the global plasma density. The formationof a MARFE is a common but not necessarily uni-versal precursor to a density limit disruption (see, forexample, Fig. 45).
In limiter tokamaks, the MARFE appears to form
on the closed ﬂux surfaces, but in divertor devices,the MARFE can emerge from the divertor region fol-
lowing the occurrence of divertor detachment (see
below). Whether the MARFE ultimately decays intoa poloidally symmetric radiation shell or persists forlonger periods, the lowering of the ﬂux surface aver-aged temperature typically produces the sequenceof events leading to a major disruption outlinedabove [230, 233]. There are, however, plasma oper-ation strategies that can prevent MARFEs fromdeveloping into a disruption: for example, increasingthe auxiliary heating power in ASDEX-Upgrade can
reverse growth of a MARFE that would otherwise
lead to disruption [240].
Numerous analyses of MARFE formation have
been performed for the limiter case, i.e. MARFEformation inside closed ﬂux surfaces (see, for exam-ple, [241{246]), and there is general agreement onthe main elements of the phenomenon. As the elec-tron temperature falls under the inﬂuence of radia-tion cooling to values in the vicinity of 10 eV, powerlosses due to rising impurity radiation can no longerbe balanced by parallel and perpendicular thermalconduction, leading to a growing thermal instabil-
ity. While various suggestions have been made for
the source of the poloidally asymmetric nature ofthe instability, this aspect has not been satisfactorilyresolved. Moreover, since the analyses are essentiallyconcerned with the linear stability of the MARFE,and are generally restricted to zero dimensional orone dimensional treatments of the plasma equilib-rium (but see [246] for a two dimensional model),they are of limited value for making quantitative pre-
dictions.
In diverted plasmas, plasma behaviour near the
density limit, and in particular the development of a
MARFE, is closely intertwined with the phenomenathat occur at divertor detachment (Sections 4.2{4.4).A complete understanding of the processes inﬂuenc-ing the limiting (edge) density in a diverted plasma,therefore, involves an analysis of the relationshipbetween plasma parameters at the midplane separa-
trix and the corresponding parameters in the diver-
tor plasma in the vicinity of the target plate. This
physics is more appropriate to the analysis of diver-tor behaviour presented in Chapter 4 and a detaileddiscussion is deferred until then. Experimentally, it isobserved (see, for example, [222,247{250]) that as thebulk density rises, the plasma density at the divertortarget initially rises. With increasing edge density,however, both the density and electron temperatureat the target fall. When the temperature at the tar-
get drops to the vicinity of several eV, the plasma
begins to detach from the target, initially close tothe separatrix. At the same time, a highly radiatingregion, denoted an ‘X-point MARFE’, moves out ofthe divertor towards the X-point and, if the bulk den-sity continues to rise, the MARFE enters the bulkplasma, precipitating the growth of MHD activityand, ultimately, disruption.
The processes involved in the density limit in
diverted plasmas are understood to a large extentand have been modelled analytically (see, for exam-ple, [251{253]). It can readily be shown that there isa maximum density that can be maintained at themidplane separatrix: this density is essentially deter-mined by classical transport along eld lines to thedivertor and the recycling and loss mechanisms (radi-ation, recombination, etc.) in the divertor. The maxi-
mum density derives from the fact that the separatrix
temperature is determined by electron heat conduc-tion from the midplane separatrix to the cooler diver-tor along the scrape o layer. In addition, momen-tum transfer by charged and neutral particles in thedivertor determines the plasma pressure at the sep-aratrix. Thus, for given power ﬂow across the sepa-ratrix, scrape o layer width, and divertor geometry,these mechanisms together set the midplane separa-trix density.
While analytic models are useful for assessing
trends and parametric sensitivities of the maximumdensity, the complexity of the competing processesand of geometric eects in the cold divertor region asdetachment occurs necessitates the use of two dimen-sional multi-ﬂuid codes for quantitative predictions(see Chapter 4, Section 4).
3.3. H-mode density limit
While the disruptive density limit bounds the
MHD stability of the plasma, sustaining high fusionpower in a device such as ITER requires the main-tenance of H-mode connement. Numerous experi-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2319

--- Page 71 ---

ITER Physics Basis
ments have shown that gas fuelled H-modes exhibit
a density limit that manifests itself as a gradual
degradation of energy connement as the limit is
approached, and which eventually results in a returnto L-mode connement at densities somewhat lowerthan the L-mode density limit (see, for example,[222,233,254]). This limiting density for gas fuelledH-mode operation appears to be bounded in manypresent day experiments by the Greenwald den-sity, although certain experiments (see, for exam-ple, [233,247]) have demonstrated H-mode operation
at densities 30{50% beyond the Greenwald scaling
(Fig. 47), albeit typically at high safety factor.
As in L-mode experiments, pellet fuelling has
been used to extend the density limit somewhatbeyond the Greenwald scaling (see, for example,[240,255,256]), albeit with some penalty in conne-ment quality or problems with eventual radiative col-
lapse owing to impurity radiation (Fig. 48). These
results show that loss of H-mode connement is notinevitable despite n>n
GW.
L-mode, non-disruptive
L-mode, disruptive
ELMy H-mode, non-disruptiveGreenwald 'limit':
ne,lim(1020 m-3) = I(MA)/( pa2)15
10
5
0
0123 456ELM-free H-mode, non-disruptive
Plasma current (MA)Line average density (1019 m-3)
Figure 47. Greenwald diagram for L-mode and H-mode
plasmas in JET. Gas fuelled plasmas attained densities30% beyond the Greenwald value with little connement
degradation, while pellet fuelled plasmas reached higher
densities (after Ref. [233]).
The processes that limit the density at which
H-mode connement can be maintained dier fromthose responsible for the L-mode density limit, butare not yet fully understood. A possible explanationhas been developed by the ASDEX-Upgrade group interms of an edge parameter operational diagram forthe H-mode [257]. As shown in Fig. 49, this diagram
indicates the various operational boundaries inﬂu-
encing H-mode behaviour in terms of the electron
temperature and density at the top of the H-modeedge pedestal.
It is proposed [257] that the quality of H-mode
connement is inﬂuenced by the parameters of thepedestal, and that in gas fuelled discharges, increas-ing the pedestal density at the expense of thepedestal temperature produces a transition fromt y p eIt ot y p eI I IE L M sa n dt h e nt oL - m o d e( s e e
Fig. 49). While the underlying physical processes
that determine this behaviour have not yet beenidentied (see further discussion in Section 4.3), thisnevertheless suggests that, as in L-mode plasmas, thedensity limit is again an edge density limit. It cannotbe excluded, however, that scrape o layer and diver-tor processes also play some role in determining theplasma behaviour in the vicinity of the limit [253].
3.4. Means to obtain high density in ITER
While the operational diagram in Fig. 49 appears
to oer a route to high density, high connementoperation close to the ideal ballooning limit at theright hand side of the diagram, it has, in prac-tice, proved dicult to access this regime with gasfuelling. Pellet injection from the low eld side of the
plasma has allowed access to somewhat higher den-
sities, but the low fuelling eciency observed withsuch injection, which has necessitated additional gasfuelling, suggests that this approach may not be anattractive scenario for ITER.
A major challenge at the ITER scale is to achieve
pellet injection velocities that permit the pellet topenetrate beyond the pedestal and ELM aectedregion. An alternative scenario that has recently been
developed in present experiments is the injection of
pellets from the high eld side of the plasma [258].This has allowed steady state densities above theGreenwald value to be maintained with little loss ofconnement quality (Fig. 50). The physics processesthat inﬂuence the evolution of the density pertur-bation produced by the pellet, and which allow ahigher fuelling eciency for high eld side as opposedto low eld side injection, are under investigation.However, it appears plausible that localized magnetic
curvature eects should inﬂuence this behaviour dif-
ferently on the inside and outside of the plasmaand could account for the improved performanceobtained with high eld side launch.
A further technique that has shown a promising
2320
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 72 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
ne
ne(a)1.5 nGW
01014
Density (10 20 m-3)
tE/tITER92-PPrad (MW)
0PNBI = 7.2 MW
FB controlled pellets
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Time (s)ASDEX-U 8167
5
01tE/tE(ITER89P) 1.8nenGWDensity (10 20 m-3)
1
0
0 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.5
Time (s)0PNBIPradPower (MW) > PNBI 
Radiation collapsePellets 2 2
2DIII-D 90613
Figure 48. Above Greenwald pellet fuelling experiments in ASDEX-Upgrade and DIII-D.
0 4 6 8 10 200.20.40.6Te (at a - 2 cm)  (keV)
ne (at a - 2 cm)  (1019 m-3) Ideal MHD unstable
Radiation unstableL-modeH-mode
type III ELMsH-mode
type I ELMs
ELM-free H-mode
(not stationary)
Type I ELMs
Compound ELMs
Type III ELMs
L-Mode
L Density LimitH-modeIdeal ballooning limitIp = 1 MA
Ip = 0.8 MA
Figure 49. H-mode operational diagram for ASDEX-
Upgrade presented in terms of the measured electron
temperature and density 2 cm inside the separatrix (this
location corresponds to the top of the H-mode pedestal).Boundaries indicating dierent types of connementregime are indicated (Ref. [257]). The limiting boundof edge pressure ( nT) corresponds closely to the pres-
sure gradient for onset of ideal MHD ballooning. The‘limiting density’ for H-mode operation is approximately710
19m−3(cf. the similar H-mode limit shown in
Fig. 45). (Same as Fig. 21.)
deep fuelling capability, though not yet in H-mode
plasmas, is the use of compact toroids on the toka-mak de Varennes (TdeV) [259]. The possible applica-
tion of these techniques to ITER is discussed further
in Section 3.4.
A further operational aspect of obtaining reliableoperation at high normalized density is related to
the delicate control of the plasma parameters, espe-cially the edge density and radiation fraction, thatis needed to access and stay in the relatively smalloperational domain for high density, high radiation
fraction H-modes, which typically lie close to a num-
ber of operational limit boundaries (see, for exam-ple, Fig. 1 and Fig. 5). Here, implementation offeedback control of the fuelling and impurity ratesthat is eected on the basis of core plasma radia-tion fraction and divertor plasma measurements andimplementation of control algorithms that act onthe basis of real time plasma operation state ‘cog-nizance’ [260,261] have proven to be very helpful inbeing able to reliably obtain and sustain such ‘highly
optimized’ plasma operation modes. The basis for
such state cognizant plasma control is further pre-sented in Chapter 8.
4. Disruption and disruption
related eects
Disruptions are an endemic and likely unavoid-
able (at least on an occasional basis) aspect of toka-mak operation. For disruptions in reactor tokamaks,
the ratio of plasma thermal energy to the rst wall
and/or plasma facing component surface area is suf-ciently high that localized surface melting, vapor-ization and erosion of the aected areas (e.g. diver-tor targets or localized portions of the rst wall) isinevitable during the thermal quench phase of a dis-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2321

--- Page 73 ---

ITER Physics Basis
#9296
1
0.5Line-average density (1020 m-3); Greenwald density (1020 m-3)  
nene,Gr
Time (s)4
0Divertor neutral density(1020 m-3); Total radiation power fraction
no(div)PRad/PHeat
00.5
2.4 2.2 2.8 2.6 3.0 3.4 3.2210
05
010
Heating power (MW) 3
03
 
tE / tE-ITERH92 Teo (keV)
neo / ne1.5
ne,Gr~1.5 x 
Central electron temperature and density
Heating power; normalized global energy confinement
Figure 50. Sustained above Greenwald H-mode oper-
ation in ASDEX-Upgrade with feedback controlled high
eld side pellet injection fuelling and 10 MW NBI heating
(from Ref. [258]).
ruption. In addition, during the current quench phase
of disruption, there are electromagnetic (EM) loads(owing to induced currents) on electrically conduct-
ing rst wall and vacuum vessel structures. In reac-
tor tokamaks, these EM loads typically correspondto pressures of 0.5 MPa (5 atm), and thus result in
structural loadings on the aected components thatare typically higher than the loadings that arise inthese components owing to their vacuum/pressurecontainment and gravity/seismic support functions.In addition to producing these immediate thermaland structural loadings, the current quench phaseof disruptions in elongated tokamaks is usually ver-
tically unstable (resulting in what is termed a ver-
tical disruption or vertical displacement episode, orVDE). VDEs result in the generation of ex-plasmahalo currents { plasma currents that ﬂow helicallyalong the in-plasma eld lines that intersect plasmafacing surfaces { and the poloidal reconnection ofthese in-plasma currents through the rst wall sur-faces produces localized radial and vertical forces onthese surfaces and global vertical and radial loadings
on the collective in-vessel system and torus vacuum
vessel. Finally, in high current reactor tokamaks,there is theoretical but well justied concern thatthe high electric elds inherent in the current quenchphase of a disruption and/or VDE (even without apreceding thermal quench) can convert an apprecia-ble fraction of the initial plasma current to 10 MeV
runaway electron current. The ultimate dissipation of
this current to in-vessel surfaces can again result in
localized surface thermal damage and erosion.
This Section addresses disruptions and their con-
sequential eects, with emphasis on how such eectsextrapolate to reactor tokamak conditions. Disrup-tion causes, MHD instability development and fre-
quency are addressed in Section 4.1. The thermal
and current quench characteristics of disruptions {the key basis for the EM and thermal loading designof in-vessel and vessel components { are addressedin Section 4.2. The characteristics of VDEs and halocurrents and of runaway electron conversion anddeposition are, respectively, covered in Sections 4.3and 4.4. It is worth noting here that these two pro-cesses may be at least partly complementary and
inter-related: vertical instability typically tends to
mitigate substantial runaway conversion, at least inpresent tokamaks, and so the two subjects must ulti-mately be considered together. A third aspect, fastplasma power and/or current shutdown by impurityinjection { which is also closely related in reactortokamaks to runaway conversion and the mitigationof VDE loads { is addressed in Section 4.5. This dis-cussion is followed by a presentation in Section 4.6 ofthe more general topic of disruption avoidance and
disruption eect amelioration. Finally, Section 4.7
addresses the need for integrated and self-consistentmodelling of the full sequence of disruption eectsand ensuing consequences, a capability that is shownto be ultimately necessary to make denitive predic-tions of the disruption and disruption eect charac-teristics in a reactor tokamak and in ITER.
4.1. Causative factors, development of
instability, and frequency of occurrence
It is well known that the achievable domain of
stable operation in tokamaks is limited: in plasmacurrent by the safety factor q
 ,i nd e n s i t yb yt h e
Greenwald density limit parameter
nGW(1020m−3)=I(MA)=a2(m)
and in pressure by the Troyon normalized beta
parameter
N=h(%)iI(MA)=a(m)B(T):
Each of these ‘operational limit’ parameters has a
nominal limit { minimum q ,m a x i m u m n=nGWand
maximumN{ and approach to the respective lim-
iting values ( q 2,n=nGW1a n dN3:5) usu-
2322 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 74 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
ally initiates an increase in the level of MHD activity
and eventually onset of major disruption.
As a result of major disruptions, plasma energy
connement is lost, the plasma is cooled to sub-keVtemperatures in less than 1 ms, and global contam-ination of the plasma by products of chamber walldesorption and erosion ensues. These factors resultin a dramatic increase in plasma electrical resistanceand an ensuing rapid current quench, at rates that
can approach 1000 MA s
−1. The EM loadings from
the current quench on tokamak torus vacuum vesselsand in-vessel components results in structural load-ings and forces on these components. These loadingsand forces become more signicant in high perfor-mance tokamaks operating at elds higher than 2{3T .F o r x e d q
 and elongation, rst wall magnetic
pressures scale as B2, so ITER and reactor toka-
mak pressures will be about 4{9 times higher thanin present ‘low eld’ tokamaks.
In addition to these EM loading eects, during
the thermal quench there are also impulsive thermaland particle ﬂuxes to the plasma facing componentsurfaces, with corresponding surface heating and ero-sion and associated thermal stress and fatigue. Whilethe structural and plasma facing component surfacedesigns of present tokamaks have generally been suf-cient to accommodate the thermal and EM loading
eects from disruptions and their associated conse-
quential eects (halo currents and runaway electronformation, see Sections 4.3 and 4.4), instances ofin-vessel component damage and unanticipated ves-sel and in-vessel component forces have occurred inpresent experiments, in part owing to loading con-ditions or current ﬂow patterns that were not fullyanticipated in the original design basis. Modica-tion of in-vessel component designs to fully with-
stand disruption thermal and/or EM loading have
been required in many ‘modern’ tokamaks, includ-ing JET, JT-60U and PBX.
4.1.1. Disruptions in reactor tokamaks and in ITER
Disruptions and their consequential eects pose
signicant design challenges for reactor regime toka-maks in general and for ITER in particular. Thesechallenges arise in part owing to the higher magnetic
elds ( 6 T) needed to achieve burning plasmas
in such devices, and in part owing to the inherentlyunfavourable size scaling of thermal quench energyloading in large tokamaks, wherein the plasma ther-mal energy increases as the cube of the device dimen-sion, whereas the surface area for energy deposi-tion increases only as the square of the dimension.
This size scaling means that, for example, thermal
quench energy deposition levels from ohmic plasma
disruptions in ITER are already capable of producingappreciable divertor target surface vaporization. Thecombination of higher eld and/or larger size makethermal loading eects up to two orders of magnitudehigher in ITER than in present sub-ignition exper-iments, and EM loading eects up to one order ofmagnitude higher.
Modern tokamaks, even the largest operating
devices (JET, JT-60U and TFTR) have, generally,up to now, been able to manage the consequencesof disruptions with only limited impact on opera-tional schedules, albeit with the need in some casesfor application of special rst wall surface recondi-tioning actions (for example, TFTR required about400 cleaning pulses to fully recover from a major dis-ruption) and, in some cases, with the imposition of
administrative controls to discourage undue occur-
rence of disruption, or with implementation of specialcontrol procedures to avoid impending disruption orto mitigate the consequences of subsequent eects.This relative lack of long term consequential eectsof disruptions in present tokamaks is the main reasonwhy special systems for management and mitigationof disruption consequences have been largely absentin present tokamak praxis. There is, however, a wellknown incentive for the operating sta of every toka-
mak to determine parameters for plasma operation
and disruption frequency and recovery that allowan acceptable balance to be obtained between thedevelopment of maximum plasma performance andthe ecient utilization of the available plasma oper-ation time. The balance that is obtained varies fromtokamak to tokamak, but there is a tendency for thelarger tokamaks to be somewhat more cautious aboutproducing an undue number of disruptions and to
take control and mitigation actions that either pre-
vent the occurrence of disruption or limit the conse-quential eects of disruption (see Section 4.6).
We anticipate for ITER that a systematic ap-
proach to disruption avoidance and consequenceamelioration will be necessary and prudent, sinceeach disruption will at a minimum consume a niteportion of the divertor target thickness and opera-
tional lifetime: for nominal parameters and 10% dis-
ruption frequency, disruption and sputtering erosionof the targets in ITER are estimated to be approxi-mately equal in an integral sense, and the ‘disruptionallocation’ for a typical target will be of the orderof several hundred disruptions. In addition to the
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2323

--- Page 75 ---

ITER Physics Basis
anticipated consumption of the divertor target sur-
face, the combination of a hot plasma VDE (Sec-
tion 4.3) or runaway conversion event (Section 4.4)
with the geometrical localization inherent in theachievable limitations on the rst wall to toroidaleld alignment can cause localized surface damageto the rst wall that will require surface repair ormodule replacement. It will be highly desirable toavoid this latter degree of intervention.
It is therefore reasonable to suppose that the
ITER plasma control system (see Chapter 8) willincorporate a number of means to predict and avoid
the occurrence of major disruptions and hot plasma
VDEs (see Section 4.3) and to mitigate or amelio-rate the eects of the disruptions and VDEs thatcannot be avoided (see Section 4.6). However, theconcept development and testing of such disruptionpredictions, avoidance and amelioration means arepresently the subject of R&D studies in presenttokamaks, and there are a number of physics issuesinvolved in the extrapolation of such means to a reac-tor tokamak, and, hence, nal denition of the dis-
ruption avoidance and amelioration means that will
be implemented in ITER awaits progress in this reac-tor critical aspect of plasma control R&D.
4.1.2. The physical nature of major disruptions
The basic physical nature of disruptions in toka-
maks is well understood and hinges upon the factthat the tokamak magnetic conguration can become
unstable to helical perturbations of the form
(r;t)=(r)expi(!t+m−n’)
whereand’are the poloidal and toroidal angles
andmandnare the corresponding poloidal and
toroidal integer mode numbers. The rapid and ulti-mately non-linear explosive growth of such instabil-ities, especially in a multi-mode combination, givesrise to the rapid loss of thermal energy connementthat starts the disruption sequence.
Two distinct physical phenomena have been pro-
posed as disruption mechanisms as follows.
(1) The magnetic reconnection (overlapping) of
plasma areas with dierent helicity [262]. Thisreconnection is possible under the non-linear
development of helical instabilities (non-linear
tearing mode). The resulting plasma wideregion of chaotic magnetic eld provides aconductive transport mechanism for the rapidloss of thermal energy in the onset phase ofdisruption.(2) The non-linear development of the ideal heli-
cal instability in conditions of low magnetic
shear. This development can result in captur-
ing and macroscopic transportation of ‘vacuumbubbles’ (helical ﬂux tubes with cold periph-eral plasma) from the boundary into the centreof the plasma column [263]. The net result ofthis process is, again, a rapid loss of thermalenergy, this time largely by macroscopic mix-ing, with subsequent nal conduction to theplasma aected surfaces.
Consideration of the observable details of disrup-
tion instability development and thermal energy losstends to suggest that the second mechanism is morelikely to be ultimately responsible for the develop-
ment of major disruption. There is, however, clear
evidence for an important role for mechanism (1),particularly in the precursor growth phase thatoccurs before the thermal quench begins, and bothmechanisms may be operative in some disruptions.In any case, numerous experiments [230, 264{268]show that the major disruption thermal quenchdevelops after an initial fast ﬂattening of the T
e(r)
prole in the centre, a behaviour essentially likethe ﬂattening that occurs (without disruption) in
a sawtooth oscillation (see Section 2.2). This pre-
thermal quench ‘sawtooth’ behaviour points indi-rectly to loss of the magnetic shear in the plasmacentre as being the instability enabling mechanism.Direct magnetic measurements that conrm shearloss during a major disruption have not been car-ried out yet, however, they have been done dur-ing softer internal disruptions { in normal saw-teeth { using Faraday rotation and MSE [269] in
JET.
These measurements demonstrate the apparent
rise of qin the centre after a sawtooth: the current
prole ﬂattening and magnetic shear decrease. Withthe increase of the disruption energy,  qrises to 0.2.
We can expect that this value will reach close to 0.5{
1 in a ‘giant’ sawtooth (see Section 2.2), and the
penetration of m= 2 perturbations into the plasma
centre will become possible.
Soft X-ray measurements (Fig. 51) made just
before a major disruption in T-10 demonstrate both
the precursor growth phase, the coalescence of the
m=1a n dm= 2 magnetic islands, and the even-
tual entrance of a cold ‘bubble’ into the plasma core.A generally similar sequence of instability growthand disruption data is obtained in a wide variety oftokamaks, but there are variations in the details of
2324
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 76 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
the sequence and data both within a given tokamak
(owing to variations in the pre-disruption plasma
parameters) and from tokamak to tokamak. Presen-
tation of the richness of this detail and its correla-tion with various interpretations of non-linear MHDinstability theory is beyond the scope of this Sec-tion. But here it suces to say that a great dealof magnetic and plasma soft X-ray and electroncyclotron emission data on disruptions is available,and that discussions of sometimes complementarymodels of detailed MHD evolution of the after pre-
cursor instability growth phase of a disruption con-
tinue within the disruption/MHD community. Rep-resentative examples of the mode growth data andMHD interpretation and further references to theextensive literature on instability growth can befound in [24,267{271].
Finally, as was manifested in ‘advanced perfor-
mance’ JET plasma operation regimes with smallmagnetic shear in the centre, the development ofmajor disruption is very possible [198]. The same ten-dency is typical for all regimes with negative shear in
the centre. The destruction of hollow current prole
(nearq
min) in this regime results in major disrup-
tions (see the discussion of MHD stability of reverseshear plasmas in Section 2.7).
The obtained experimental experience proves the
suggestion that the key event preceding the majordisruption is the weakening of the magnet shear inthe core. The reasons for this weakening could be dif-ferent: instabilities in the centre (minor disruptions),locked mode development, impurity accumulation,
neoclassical tearing mode development, and so on.
The threshold for each instability corresponds to anMHD limit on current, density, pressure, peripheryperturbations, etc.
The most common form of this type of event is a
minor disruption.
4.1.3. Minor disruption
The notion of minor disruption (earlier called ‘pre-
disruption’) [264] is used to dene phenomena withfast local reconnection of magnetic eld lines andcorresponding plasma losses, but which do not lead
to large energy ﬂuxes onto walls and current quench.
The energy coming into a divertor in a major dis-
ruption is comparable with the total plasma thermalenergy (JT-60, [272]), whereas, during a minor dis-ruption, the thermal energy loss is only about 5{20%.This loss is due to the local character of overlappingof neighbour magnetic islands with mandm1,
Figure 51. Soft X-ray tomographic reconstruction of
the development of a major disruption in T-10. Contoursof equal SXR emission; high emission region diagonallyshaded. Frames A{F (at 60 si n t e r v a l s ) : m= 1 precursor
growth; frames G{L ( t= 830s total, interval varies):
m= 2 mode growth; frames M{T ( t= 230s total,
interval varies somewhat): m=1a n dm= 2 modes coa-
lesce and ‘cold’ bubble enters plasma column (frame T).
forming as a result of non-linear tearing or neoclassi-
cal tearing mode development. The overlapping pro-
cess is manifested as a fast turbulent mixing on a
time-scale= 10{100s. Simultaneously, the main
losses of plasma energy and T(r) local prole ﬂatten-
ing occur, likely owing to magnetic stochastization.
Internal disruptions { the sawtooth instability
withm=1a n dn= 1 { are very similar to minor dis-
ruptions. The giant sawtooth is usually accompaniedby island overlap for the m=1a n dm= 2 modes and
looks much like a minor disruption. Owing to its localcharacter, the minor disruption can develop in theplasma centre and also, under double tearing mode
development in the negative shear regime [210,211],
in the ring area near the column boundary.
4.1.4. ELMs
MHD events localized in the plasma edge (called
ELMs) share certain similarities with minor dis-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2325

--- Page 77 ---

ITER Physics Basis
ruptions. ELMs develop near the column boundary
in conditions of large pressure gradient in H-mode
regimes. ELMs are believed to be some sort of pres-
sure driven modes with a wide spectrum n= 1{15,
while for usual minor disruptions n= 1{3. Discus-
sion of the MHD basis for ELMs and a brief reviewof ELM phenomenology will be found in Section 2.6.
Two main types of ELMs are observed: type I
ELMs and type III ELMs. For type I ELMs, therecurrence period increases with increasing plasmaheating power till a transition into single (solitary)ELMs { called ‘giant’ ELMs [19] { occurs. In con-trast, for type III ELMs, the period decreases withincreasing heating power and or stabilization with
the rise of electron temperature near the boundary:
this behaviour points to the resistive origin of thistype of ELM.
Giant ELMs can have eects on plasma facing
surfaces similar to minor disruptions. Experience inJET [162] shows that the maximum energy outputin this type of ELM can reach 10% of the total
thermal energy, and the typical time of the processis about 100 s. The resulting local thermal loads to
the divertor can reach the value of 5 GW m
−2.E v a l -
uations for ITER give divertor target power load-
ings of about 30 GW m−2(3M Jm−2deposited
energy): this level will be high enough to producedivertor target sublimation and erosion.
Overlap between a giant ELM and a giant saw-
tooth can be especially dangerous: the resulting ther-mal disturbance that develops can span the width ofthe entire plasma column and initiate a major disrup-tion. Giant ELMs or giant sawteeth alone may alsoact as triggers for neoclassical island tearing modegrowth (Section 2.2) and can thus also lead to even-tual disruption.
4.1.5. Dynamics of major disruptions
In Fig. 52 we can see a typical n
e(or) limit
major disruption in JET [230]. This kind of disrup-tion will likely be most dangerous for ITER.
The three characteristic steps in major disruption
development are shown in this example (Fig. 52): a
phase of slow thermal quench, a phase of fast thermal
quench with follow-up short positive current pulseI
p0:1Ipgeneration, and, nally, a phase of cur-
rent quench.
Analysis shows that the origin of the slow ther-
mal quench phase is a locked (non-rotating) n=1
helical mode. This slow initial thermal quench onsetis followed by a second more rapid and nearly com-plete cooling of the plasma column. The sudden ini-
tiation of a locked (non-rotating) mode (see Sec-
tion 2.5), which frequently occurs as the result of
minor disruptions or sawtooth fast development inthe plasma centre, is believed to be responsible forthe thermal quench onset. If rotation is only braked,but not stopped completely (TFTR), a major disrup-tion does not occur. This points to a possible way ofavoiding major disruptions of this kind in ITER bythe forced rotation of the column. This can possiblybe done using NBI.
The origin of main fast thermal quench is believed
to bem;n=1;1 mode development (giant sawtooth,
TFTR [267]), as was originally seen in small tokamakexperiments [266].
The direct cause for the ensuing major disruption
(marked by the l
idrop and positive current spike) is
believed to be the loss of magnetic shear and ‘bub-
ble capture’, as has been mentioned above. Here, the
precise details of shear loss, bubble capture and sub-sequent partial or full plasma cooling are complexand can vary from tokamak to tokamak and fromplasma to plasma in a given tokamak. This variationgives rise to the range of thermal quench behaviourdetails (i.e. thermal content decay waveforms) thatare observed. But, despite these variations, the eec-tive consequences are similar: there is a rapid lossof thermal energy followed by initiation of a cur-
rent quench. The characteristics of these phases are
addressed in Section 4.2.
4.1.6. Disruption frequency
The frequency of occurrence of disruptions in
present experiments on a per pulse basis falls in therange of 1{100%, with the low end of this range cor-responding to plasma operation with reliable hard-ware and well documented ‘reference’ or ‘set-up’
discharges with conservative operational parameters
(q
95,n=nGWandN, and easily controlled plasma
shape). There are also examples of high performance‘reference’ discharges that operate quite near theideal MHD beta limit with disruption frequencies1% (see, for example, TFTR ‘supershots’ [273]).
The high end of the disruption frequency rangeis obtained in plasma operation development cam-paigns with parameters close to or exceeding key
plasma operation limits (low q
95, high normalized
density, high edge radiation fraction, and/or highnormalized beta), or to operational situations wheredisruptions in a secondary phase of the plasma oper-ation scenario (e.g. during current ramp-down) haveno deleterious impact and are accepted as a rou-
2326
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 78 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Plasma current (MA)
Electron temperature (keV)
(from ECE, data smoothed)
Vloop voltage (V)2.0
1.5
1.0
0.0
50
0
50Pulse 13505
themal
quenchcurrent
quenchprecursor
growth
Time (s)10.51 10.52 10.53
Figure 52. Typical disruption in JET (ohmic plasma).
The slow and fast phases of the thermal quench, theensuing positive current rise and negative voltage spike
and the subsequent onset of the current quench are
shown. Precursor growth occurs during a period thatmay extended from up to 100 ms before thermal quench(Ref. [230]). Note that the zero of the plasma current axisis suppressed: only the rst part of the current quench isshown
tine operation consequence. When such ‘don’t care’
disruptions and obvious hardware failure initiateddisruptions are eliminated from consideration, the
disruptivity during current ﬂat-top (disruptions per
pulse) typically falls in the range of 3{40%, with theupper end of this range again being characteristic ofexploratory operation close to operational limits.
While attempts have been made to correlate dis-
ruption frequency with plasma shape, edge safety
factor, proximity to theoretical or empirical betalimits, density limits (radiation or H-mode thresh-old limits, see Section 3.3), and so forth, no over-all understanding of the relationship of disruptionfrequency to these parameters, and proximity (asopposed to transgression) of well dened operationallimits, has so far emerged. While there are exam-ples of broadly collected data sets that show a ten-
dency for disruption likelihood to increase in a grad-
ual manner as various operational limit parametersare approached (see, for example, the TFTR datain [273]), there are counterexamples from the sameexperiment that show that for a given discharge,it is possible to predict the threshold for onsetof disruption arising from ideal MHD instability to
within a few per cent (see Section 4.6, Fig. 53) and to
avoid disruption by staying just below this threshold.
Under these conditions, the ‘physics’ reliability ofthis type of high performance ‘developed’ dischargecan be 99% or higher.
2 43 56 7891 00.00.3
0.20.4
0.10.50.6Fraction Disrupting
qeffq95 = 3Sample = 7039 pulses; f dis = 9.6%
Figure 53. Disruption frequency versus eective safety
factor (qe1:25q95) in JT-60U. Only disruptions dur-
ing current ﬂat-top are included. A wide range of exper-iments and plasma parameters are included in the dataset. Data and analysis courtesy of R. Yoshino on behalfof the JT-60 team.
Figure 53 shows representative disruption like-
lihood data summarizing the per pulse disruptionfrequency obtained in JT-60U over a prolongedcampaign of plasma operation with a wide rangeof plasma currents and elds and some shapevariation. Overall disruption frequency per shotfor current ﬂat-top is 9.6% (average for 7039 shotswithq
e1:25q95=2:2{10). The average fre-
quency versus qerises gradually to about 15%
with decreasing qef r o m5t o3( q95= 4{2.4),
with local maxima of 20% atq953:8 and 2.8.
Disruptivity as a function of q95evaluated on a
per second basis (disruptions per second of plasmaoperation duration) in Alcator C-Mod and TCVfor similar ‘wide ranging campaign’ periods show asimilar nearly qindependent frequency distribution.
The data tend to show a gradual rise in disruptionfrequency in the q4 regime, but the details of the
rise vary from machine to machine and the statistics
of the frequency distribution in the 2 q3
domain are poor. There is also anecdotal evidencethat it is possible to improve the reliability of low- q
operation if plasma operation goals mandate andif adequate operation time (and disruption budget)for optimization of such low- qplasmas is provided.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2327

--- Page 79 ---

ITER Physics Basis
4.1.7. Extrapolation to ITER
The design basis assumption for ITER disruption
frequency in a developed full performance operationmode with q
95=3a n dN=2:2 is 10%. The design
basis assumption for overall disruption frequencyduring the commissioning and operations develop-ment phase that leads up to this phase of ITER
operation is 30%. While these frequencies are consis-
tent with present experimental achievements, naldetailed justication for them will require continu-ing studies of the sensitivity of inherent disruptiv-ity to the proximity to operational limits (especiallydensity and non-ideal MHD beta limits) and carefulanalysis of data to separate the eects of adminis-trative limits on disruptions and plasma operationalobjectives, procedures and operator experience from
the underlying physics aspects of disruptivity. The
eect of having a sophisticated suite of plasma andmachine status diagnostics available to provide abasis for disruption avoidance and onset warning inaggressive operation regime experiments also needsto be quantied.
As is presented in Section 4.6, there are poten-
tially promising methods for the early (well beforeprecursor growth onset) prediction of impending dis-ruption and a number of ‘active’ intervention means
(including RF current drive control of mode growth)
that may make it possible to intervene during theprecursor growth phase to avoid disruption occur-rence. However, the degree to which such methodscan be applied in ITER, and their eectiveness inreducing disruption frequency, remains a matter forR&D studies in present tokamak experiments.
Given that the frequency of disruptions in ITER
will be 10% (say 1500 disruptions during a 15000
pulse basic performance phase operation campaign,
see Chapter 9), it is essential that the ITER ves-
sel and in-vessel structures be designed to accommo-date the EM and structural loading consequences ofat least this number of disruptions (plus the addi-tional disruptions that would occur in the follow-onextended performance phase). It is also essential thatthe at risk plasma facing and rst wall surfaces bedesigned to accommodate the thermal and erosioneects of the total number of disruptions expected
during their respective service lifetimes. As noted
above, there are also structural and/or thermal con-sequences of the VDEs that will follow disruptionand thermal and erosion consequences of the run-away electron conversion that may follow disrup-tion. The thermal and current quench characteris-tics of ITER disruptions, and the expected char-
acters of ITER VDEs and runaway conversion are,
respectively, developed in the following three subsec-
tions.
4.2. Disruption characterization:
thermal and current quench
Disruptions terminate plasma operation by a ther-
mal quench in which most of the plasma thermalenergy is rapidly lost, primarily by conduction to theplasma dening surfaces (limiter or divertor targets).
During a thermal quench, the core plasma temper-
ature typically falls, rst to less than several hun-dred eV and subsequently to less than 100 eV. In theensuing rapid current decay (current quench phase)that this cooling precipitates, the plasma magneticenergy is also dissipated, mostly by more or less uni-form impurity radiation to the torus vessel or rstwall surface.
The rapid loss of thermal energy during the ther-
mal quench has important design consequences forthe plasma in-vessel and torus vessel components,and the rapid change in the plasma poloidal mag-netic eld that occurs during the current quench gen-erates signicant induced electrical currents and cor-responding EM forces in electrically conducting in-vessel components and the torus vacuum vessel. Ina vertically elongated divertor tokamak, coupling of
the current decay to the vertical position instability
also results in a vertical displacement of the plasmacolumn (a VDE) that occurs on the same time-scaleas the time of the current decay.
For in-vessel component and torus vessel design
purposes in reactor tokamaks, the most importantdesign parameters are the durations of the thermaland current quenches and the parameters that char-
acterize the localization and magnitude of the result-
ing thermal energy deposition on divertor targets.There are theories that attempt to model the non-linear MHD instability development that is respon-sible for the onset of the thermal quench, and tothen model the eects of the thermal energy loss,the resulting inﬂux of wall generated impurities andthe vertical instability and halo currents that followin the current quench phase. However, the result-
ing complexities of instability development and the
plasma mixing that it produces (see Section 4.1),experiment to experiment variance in the details ofthermal and current quench and VDE phenomenain present tokamaks and the onset of new physicseects in reactor scale tokamaks (e.g. divertor surface
2328
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 80 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
vaporization and impurity generation and avalanche
multiplication of runaway electrons), make theoreti-
cal prediction of disruption characteristics and con-
sequences in future high current, high specic energyreactor tokamaks a matter of ongoing discussion andmodel development. The present status and valida-tion of the ‘integrated’ modelling capability that willbe needed to make such predictions for ITER arediscussed in Section 4.7.
In the meantime, an empirical basis is needed
to predict disruption characteristics for future reac-tor tokamaks and to this end, the ITER ExpertGroup on Disruptions, Plasma Control and MHD hasmade eorts since 1994 to establish a multi-machinedatabase, the ITER disruption database (IDDB),that can be used for characterization of disruptionsand disruption related eects. A discussion of dis-
ruption phenomenology and references and a pre-
liminary account of the expert group characteriza-tion eort through 1995 is given in [271]. The IDDBhas since been substantially expanded and now com-prises three types of data:
(1) a global disruption database from 14 tokamaks
that contains ‘typical’ data relating to disrup-tions;
(2) a halo current database from six vertically elon-
gated divertor tokamaks; and
(3) a thermal and current quench database from
seven tokamaks.
This latter database is presently limited to current
quench data, but work to add systematic thermalquench data is in progress. This Section presents thecharacterization of the thermal and current quenchaspects of disruptions based on the rst and thirdcomponents of the IDDB. Characterization of VDEsand halo currents derived from the second IDDBcomponent is presented in Section 4.3. More recent
accounts of the ITER disruption design basis spec-
ications and of the halo current characterizationderived from the IDDB can be found in [274,275].
It has not yet been possible to employ the IDDB
for runaway electron characterization. Discussion of
data on runaway generation in present experiments
and of the mostly theoretical basis for extrapolationof these data to the reactor regime will be foundin Section 4.4. Prior discussion of the runaway elec-tron design basis specications for ITER will also befound in [275].4.2.1. Thermal quench characteristics
In the sequence of events that comprises disrup-
tion in a tokamak, thermal quench follows the initialMHD precursor growth phase (see, for example, [230]and Section 4.1). From a global viewpoint, the ulti-mate result of the thermal quench is a rapid loss ofthe plasma thermal energy to the same plasma den-
ing surfaces (limiter or divertor) that were active
in dening the plasma (receiving conducted power)prior to disruption. However, on detailed inspec-tion, the thermal quench process exhibits complexi-ties in exactly how and in what time sequence theenergy loss proceeds, there are clearly discerniblenon-axisymmetric MHD eects (e.g. toroidal asym-metries) visible in which thermal energy is depositedon the aected plasma dening components, radi-
ation eects are sometimes appreciable and there
are signicant dierences among the quench dynamicbehaviours seen in various experiments and evenamong dierent discharges and types of disruptionsin the same experiment [230]. These variances areseemingly the result of the complexity of the under-lying MHD process that culminates in the precursorgrowth phase and the presence of the two MHD mix-ing mechanisms { mode overlap and ‘cold bubble’entrance (see Section 4.1) { that contribute to ther-
mal energy transport in the thermal quench phase of
disruption.
In this latter regard, evidence for the presence of
two mechanisms can be found in the fact that ther-mal quenches are often observed to take place intwo stages (see, for example, [230, 268]), as shownschematically in the inset of Fig. 54 and explic-itly in Fig. 52, Section 4.1. However, single stagethermal quenches, sometimes on a somewhat slowertime-scale, are also often observed (see, for exam-
ple, [268]), presumably owing to overlap of the two
stages. During the rst stage of two stage thermalquenches, an m;n=1;1 erosion of central temper-
ature takes place and the temperature prole insidetheq= 2 surface ﬂattens. The plasma outside the
q= 2 surface seems to still act as a thermal barrier,
although a fraction ( 10{30%) of the total thermal
energy is spilled out to the wall. In the second stage,the edge thermal barrier breaks down completely and
most or all of the remaining thermal energy is rapidly
lost to the wall. However, sometimes the second stageitself exhibits a further staging of energy loss, result-ing in a multi-step thermal energy decay waveform.
The rst stage of two stage thermal quenches can
be understood by modelling of non-linear interac-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2329

--- Page 81 ---

ITER Physics Basis
tions of 1,1, 3,2 and 2,1 magnetic islands [271]. The
time-scale of the non-linear interaction is in agree-
ment with the prediction made in [276], which is
s=[ ()3(A)2]1=5,w h e r eetais the magnetic dif-
fusion time and Ais the Alfv en time with respect
to the poloidal magnetic eld. The theoretical basisfor the time-scale of the fast quench { believed to bedetermined, at least in part, by the macroscopic con-vective transport that arises from ‘bubble entrance’ {is not as well understood or predictable on an ap r i o r i
basis, but the relevant time-scale is clearly Alfv enic.
Data for time-scales of both time-scales of thermal
quenches from the IDDB are plotted against plasmaminor radius in Fig. 54. Although the data are quitescattered, the initial delay time, 
1{2, and the nal
fast quench time, 2, both increase roughly in pro-
portion to plasma minor radius (with respective sizescaling scalings a
1:5anda1), and the ratio 1{2=2
is typically about 10. As shown in Fig. 54, extrapo-
lation of the two quench times to ITER minor radiusyields
1{220 ms and21 ms. The scatter and
error bars of the data in Fig. 54 show that these
values have considerable uncertainty, and the rangesof possible values that may occur in ITER are esti-mated to be 6{60 ms and 0.3{3 ms, respectively.
0.10 1.00 10.00.010.101.0010.0
PULSATORRTPWT-3PBX-M
TEXTOR
ASDEX-UTFTRJET
JET
JT-60UJET
JT-60UTFTRALCATOR-C
ALCATOR-CPBX-M
TEXTOR~a1.5
~a1
ITER
t1-2 (1-2 delay)
t2 (fast quench)t1-2t2Wth COMPASS-DThermal quench delay or duration (ms)
Minor radius (m)
Figure 54. Thermal quench times 1{2(delay between
initial and nal quench) and 2(fast quench) for various
tokamaks, plotted as a function of plasma minor radius.Extrapolation to ITER ( a=2:8 m) yields 
1{220 ms
and21m s .
The thermal quench duration measurements pre-
sented above are derived from plasma temperatureor pressure or soft X-ray emission measurements.There are also corresponding measurements of the
thermal energy deposition on limiter and divertor
surfaces (see, for example, [277]). Here, the ther-
mal energy lost from the plasma core is found tobe deposited on the same plasma dening surface {limiter or divertor target { that was active in receiv-ing the pre-disruption power ﬂow from the plasmaSOL. The thermal quench produces a readily observ-able surface temperature excursion whose onset andrise time is well correlated with the correspondingloss of thermal energy in the plasma core. Figure 55
shows a representative set of plasma and target
power/energy data for a disruption in the ASDEX-Upgrade tokamak.
Power to 
Divertor (MW)
Time (s)2.88 2.92 2.90
Time (s)2.88 2.92 2.900
001.0
0.40.8
0.6
0.21.2
123451.0
0.40.8
0.6
0.2
01.0
0.40.8
0.6
0.2Thermal 
QuenchCurrentQuenchPlasma Current (MA) Thermal Energy (MJ)
Energy to Divertor (MJ)
Figure 55. Plasma current and thermal energy and
inner divertor target power and cumulative thermal
energy during a disruption (pulse 6134) in ASDEX-
Upgrade. In this example, about 20% of the initial plasmathermal energy reaches the inner target at the end ofthe thermal quench. The remainder of the target energycomes from the dissipation of magnetic energy in the cur-rent quench, which is accompanied by a VDE (verticalmotion toward the divertor). The authors conclude inthis example that there is signicant loss of plasma ther-mal energy by radiation upstream of the divertor. Datacourtesy of O. Gruber for the ASDEX-Upgrade team.
Estimates derived from such data of the energy
accountability during a thermal quench show thatthe fraction of the initial plasma thermal energy thatreaches the limiter or divertor can range between
2330
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 82 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
20% and 100% of the initial plasma thermal energy.
Energy depositions in the range of 50{100% are typ-
ical (see Fig. 56 below). The lack of full accountabil-
ity for the plasma thermal energy can be explainedin several ways, including
(1) radiative diversion of what would otherwise be
power conducted to the limiter or targets;
(2) toroidal asymmetries and the lack of full
toroidal monitoring of the limiter or target andother plasma heated surfaces; and
(3) uncertainty in the limiter and target tempera-
ture rise data and in the resulting calculation
of deposited energy.
In the latter regard, the accuracy of total energy
accountability measurements is limited ( 20% accu-
racy is considered quite good), and systematic ther-
mal quench energy accountability data on a multi-machine and/or multi-discharge basis is not yet avail-able. Typical energy accountability data for severaltypes of disruptions and VDEs in DIII-D are shownin Fig. 56. The design basis recommended for ITERis 80{100% of the initial plasma thermal energy [278].The possibility of up to 30% thermal energy depo-sition on the surfaces of the ITER divertor entrance
bae is also recommended.
Measurements of the spatial prole of the sur-
face temperature rise show that the conductedpower is deposited in a radially localized regionthat corresponds (in a divertor tokamak) to theapproximate position of the pre-disruption SOL.There is, however, usually an expansion of thepoloidal width of the SOL width during the ther-mal quench, and there may also be some lat-eral (poloidal) shift in the deposition centroid. Theexpansion is typically about 3 relative to the pre-
disruption width, but expansion factors of 1{10
have been reported and there is signicant evi-dence in many cases for fast dynamic changes{ attributed to the eects of MHD ﬂuctuationsin the SOL { in the surface heat ﬂux and pro-le within the duration of the heat pulse. Thereare also changes in the ratio of deposited energyon the inboard and outboard divertor targets insingle null divertor plasmas relative to the pre-
disruption ratio for normal conducted power: an
inboard/outboard energy ratio of 2:1 is typical dur-ing disruption versus a 1:2 ratio for power dur-ing normal operation. Figure 56 shows data fortoroidal asymmetry, in{out ratio and total account-ability in various DIII-D disruptions and VDEs.These data are representative of what is reported
by other experiments, but systematic multi-machine
data on SOL expansion and inboard/outboard depo-
sition ratios and on the eects of MHD ﬂuc-tuations are presently lacking. The recommendednominal design basis for ITER is a 3-times SOLwidth expansion (to 3 cm), an inboard/outboarddivertor energy ratio that may vary between2:1 and 1:2, and the possibility of a nominaltoroidal energy peaking factor (peak/average ratio)of up to 1.5 [278].
012
Impurity
InjectionHigh
BetaHigh 
Density VDE(no data)Toroidal asymmetry [energy(65 )/energy(165 )]Energy(in)/Energy (out)0.5
01.5
1.0
01234Same shot:
(effect of toroidal 
asymmetry)
Same shot
Same shotEnergy(divertor)/Energy(plasma)
Figure 56. Toroidal asymmetry ratio, inboard/out-
board divertor target ratio and total energy accountabil-
ity (referenced to plasma thermal energy) in various DIII-
D single null divertor disruptions and VDEs. The hori-zontal arrangement of the data within the four groups isfor presentation purposes only and has no signicance.Data and analysis by A. Hyatt, C.L. Lasnier, R.L. Leeand A. Kellman.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2331

--- Page 83 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Consideration of the eects of disruption thermal
energy deposition on the aected plasma facing
surfaces in present experiments and in ITER falls
outside the scope of this chapter and the IDDB datacollection activity. Here, we note only that in presentday divertor experiments, while the time-scale ofenergy deposition is short ( 100s), the specic
plasma energy content (energy/torus surface area) islow and the resulting energy loading on the divertorsurfaces is typically less than the 0.3 MJ m
−2
threshold required to produce appreciable surface
melting and vaporization or sublimation. Accord-
ingly, target erosion owing to thermal quenchesand ‘plasma shielding’ eects { dened below {are both generally negligible in present tokamaks.In contrast, in ITER, elementary estimates showthat while the expected thermal quench will besomewhat slower ( 1 ms), the ‘raw’ incident energy
loading on the divertor targets { calculated withoutconsideration of the redistribution eect of plasmashielding but with a 3-times SOL expansion and
toroidal peaking factor assumed { will be in the
range of 30{60 MJ m
−2.T h i si sw e l la b o v et h es u r -
face vaporization threshold, which is 1M Jm−2.
Consequently, in the ITER divertor, the incidentthermal quench energy is expected to quickly lead toformation of a localized high density plasma shield-ing layer near the surface of the aected component.This layer will in turn shield the underlying surfaceand radiatively redistribute most of the remaining
incoming incident plasma thermal energy to nearby
surfaces. This ‘plasma shielding’ redistributionmechanism will limit the target surface power ﬂuxand surface erosion, but will also produce energyloadings in other nearby regions of the divertorchannel that are high enough to initiate vaporiza-tion and further propagation of plasma shielding.The resulting in-divertor energy redistribution eectis analogous to the redistribution of incident energyinside an inertial fusion hohlraum target, and is
expected, in ITER, to spread the incident thermal
quench energy over an appreciable fraction of thetotal in-divertor surface area ( 400 m
2).
Estimates of the thermal quench energy eects
expected in ITER, especially the predicted divertortarget surface erosion { which must be inferred on
the basis of simulations of the plasma shielding
and energy redistribution eect { will be found inChapter 4. Here we note only that owing to thepresent uncertainties in both the time durationof the incident energy deposition and the area(‘footprint’) of the disruption aected portionof the target surface, the sensitivity of the pre-
dicted erosion to variations in the time-scale and
energy loading magnitude (including the eects of
uncertainties in the inboard/outboard partitioning,MHD ﬂuctuation eects and toroidal asymme-tries), and also to the possibility of two or moreseparated thermal quenches in a single disruptionor a ‘slow’ quasi-linear thermal quench, will needto be examined with detailed and self-consistentmodels of the target surface response and in-divertorredistribution of incident energy.
We also note here parenthetically that both the
present quantity and quality of the plasma thermalenergy loss time-scale and magnitude data in the
present IDDB are not as good as could be desired,
and that there are very little systematic data in gen-eral on the surface energy deposition area and eec-tive SOL width and asymmetries during disruption.Consequently, future eorts to improve data qual-ity in these regards, and to better validate mod-els for extrapolation to reactor scale experiments,are required. A summary discussion of the basisfor extrapolation of present thermal quench data to
ITER and of the need for future research needs fol-
lows in Section 4.2.3 below.
4.2.2. Current quench characterization
The principal direct eects of the current quench
phase of a disruption are the EM forces that arise inthe electrically conducting structures that typicallycomprise the torus vacuum vessel and { in an ITERclass tokamak { the modular structures that makeup the plasma facing surface (rst wall) and nuclearshield. In addition, in a vertically elongated toka-mak, residual or inherent up{down asymmetries (e.g.an SN divertor) in the rst wall/vessel congurationand plasma geometry result in coupling of the m=1
vertical position instability to the current quench,
and so current quenches in elongated tokamaksare usually manifested as ‘vertical disruptions’, orVDEs, in which vertical instability and currentdecay occur simultaneously and on essentially thesame time-scale. The resulting plasma motiongenerates both toroidal and poloidal currents inthe in-vessel and vessel structures. In either case,the rst design consideration is the rate of current
decay, which not only determines the direct EM
loading (induced toroidal currents), but also entersinto determining the magnitude of the ‘ex-plasma’halo currents that produce local forces on in-vesselstructures and global vertical forces on the collectivein-vessel/torus vessel structure (see Section 4.3).
2332
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 84 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
For quantifying the anticipated current quench
characteristics of reactor tokamaks and ITER, it is
important to understand that while fast quenches
result in the highest direct EM loads, slower currentquenches are predicted { owing to the close thermalcoupling that exists between the closed ﬂux surfaceplasma core region and the open (wall intersecting)halo region in which halo current ﬂow develops; toproduce higher halo current magnitudes and verticalforces on the in-vessel and vessel system (see Sec-tion 4.3). Accordingly, the worst case design basis
situations are complementary, and it is important,
for design purposes, to understand the possible rangeof current quench durations, from minimum to max-imum. In addition, the conversion of plasma cur-rent to runaway electron current via the knock-onavalanche is theoretically predicted to depend (atleast in some marginal situations, see Section 4.4.)on current quench rate. So again, understanding ofthe range of possible quench rates is needed.
To provide for these ITER design basis needs
and to help develop a better understanding of themechanism(s) that determine current quench ratesin tokamaks and of how these mechanisms extrap-olate to an ITER class tokamak, a comprehensiveset of current quench data have recently been addedto the IDDB from Tore-Supra (192 shots), ASDEX-
Upgrade (206 shots), JET (755 shots), JT-60U (220
shots), Alcator C-Mod (2907 shots), TFTR (239shots), and DIII-D (1802 shots). Figure 57 shows theresults of analysis of the resulting multi-machine setof current quench data, in which the current quenchtime t
cqdivided by the plasma cross-section area
Sis plotted as a function of the before disruption
average current density hjp0i=Ip0=S. Here,Ip0
is the pre-disruption plasma current, S=a2is
the before disruption plasma cross-section area, and
the current decay time,  tcq, is uniformly corrected
to represent the ‘60% linear decay’ time (the timerequired for a 60% drop in the plasma current), asinferred from the time average or maximum currentquench rate data provided by the various tokamaks.As the legend for Fig. 57 shows, the basis for thecurrent decay rate or decay times provided by thevarious machines diers somewhat (80{20% currentfor ASDEX-Upgrade and Alcator C-Mod; 90{10%
for DIII-D and TFTR; 100{40% for JET, maximum
dI
p=dtfor Tore-Supra and JT-60U). Using the
‘60% linear decay’ equivalent time (i.e.  t80{20for
ASDEX-Upgrade and C-Mod,  t100{40 for JET,
0:75t90{10for DIII-D and TFTR, etc.) allows the
data from all machines to be combined.0.11101001000
0.1 1 10ASDEX-U: 80-20%
Tore-Supra:max.
JET: 100-40%
C-Mod: 80-20%JT-60U: max.
TFTR: 90-10%
DIII-D: 90-10% 
 jpo (MA/m2)Te = 2 eV5 eV8 eV
ITER
9 MA 24 MA (for ne0/K3D0.72 x 1020 m-3) Dt60%/S (ms/m2)Tokamak: Current Quench Rate Data Reporting Basis
Figure 57. Time average current quench times (for
Ip= 60%) divided by plasma cross-section area ver-
sus plasma current density before disruption. The nor-malized quench times for three electron temperatures asinferred from a simple radiative power balance model arecompared with the experimental data.
Detailed evaluation of the data from those
machines (e.g. Alcator C-Mod) in which bothmaximum and average (80{20% or 90{10%) dataare available, shows that the systematic dierencesamong the four denitions for decay rate are, aftercorrection for the explicit dierences in measurementbasis, not appreciable relative to the data scatterand the other machine-to-machine dierences that
enter into the multi-machine assessment of the
data. For example, the linear decay time inferredfrom 90{10% data in C-Mod is typically abouttwice the time inferred from 80{20% data (Fig. 58).The rate inferred from 80{20% data is similar tothe maximum rate. These statistical observationsextracted from the database are consistent with thewell known tendency of current decay waveformsto have an ‘S-shape’, with the highest decay rate
at roughly 50% current and slower initial and nal
decay rate (see inset in Fig. 58). This type ofwaveform analysis suggests that a linear decay timeinferred on the basis of a 60% change in plasmacurrent provides a good measure of both the averageand peak instantaneous current decay rate.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2333

--- Page 85 ---

ITER Physics Basis
80% —> 20%
90% —> 10%
0.000.020.040.060.080.10
0 246 8 10
Current Quench Time (ms)Fraction of Cases in Database
Plasma Current90%
10%20%80%t90-10Data analysis basis (schematic)
Time
Figure 58. Histogram of current quench times (100% linear decay) derived from 80{
20% and 90{10% current thresholds in Alcator C-Mod. Current magnitudes are measured
relative to the initial before disruption plasma current. Data and analysis by R. Granetz.
The data presented in Fig. 57 demonstrate that
while a wide range of area normalized quench times
are obtained in a given experiment, the mean nor-malized quench times are essentially independent of
(1) device conguration (limiter/circular or diver-
tor/elongated);
(2) the presence or absence of vertical instabilities
during the current quench (there is no dier-ence evident between limiter/stable data anddivertor/unstable data);
(3) machine size and toroidal strength; and
(4) before disruption plasma current density.
Furthermore, the minimum value of  t
cq=Sin the
database is bounded by 0.8 MA ms−1m−2, again
independent of initial current density: this boundimplies that the time in ITER for 60% current decay
will be about 32 ms, or 53 ms for 100% decay. These
values are minimum decay times: if disruptions inITER prove to have the same type of decay timevariance as present experiments, the fastest ‘typical’decay times in ITER will be about 100 ms, and muchlonger decay times, exceeding 1000 ms are possible.As is noted above, such ‘slow’ current decays are pre-
dicted to result in higher halo currents and vertical
forces during the VDE phase of the current decay.
The basis for both the wide variation seen in the
normalized quench time within a given experimentand the existence of a lower bound on the normalized
quench time for all experiments can be understood
in terms of a model for the quench phase in whichthe characteristic current decay time t
cq=Le
p=Rp
can be rewritten in terms of the normalized quench
time as
tcq
S=Le
p=2R 0
p(12)
whereLe
pis the eective plasma inductance (as
determined by the poloidal ﬂux within the torusvessel or rst wall), R
pis plasma resistance, R0
is the major radius, and p=RpS=2R 0.F o r
the relatively fast current quench times that com-prise most of the database entries, only the plasma
inductive energy internal to the torus vacuum ves-
sel enters into determining the current decay rateand 1:2L
int
p=1:20R0li=2(liis the usual inter-
nal inductance) is a good estimate for the eectiveplasma inductance. Given this estimate and the wellknown fact that the internal inductance of typical
2334
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 86 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
tokamak plasmas is essentially constant, the ratio
tcq=Sis determined only by the plasma resistiv-
ity, which, in turn, depends mainly upon the decay
phase electron temperature Teand only weakly, espe-
cially at low temperatures, on plasma density andimpurity species. The normalized decay times pre-dicted by Eq. (12) can be compared with the exper-imental data by means of a simple calculation ofthe average plasma resistivity in the current decayphase, wherein T
eandpare determined through the
power balance between joule heating from the decay-
ing plasma current and impurity radiation loss, the
impurity content being adjusted to self-consistentlyobtain the desired temperature. This calculationgives

p=ne
jp2
fzLz(Te) (13)
wherene,fz,a n dLzare, respectively, the elec-
tron density, impurity fraction, and the impurityradiation rate assuming coronal equilibrium. Using
Eqns (12) and (13), L
e
p=2R 0=0:084Hm−1
(li=0:7 plus 20% ﬂux between plasma surface and
rst wall), assuming a carbon impurity and takingthe corresponding coronal equilibrium ionizationstate (Z
e) and radiation rates into account yields
the normalized decay times versus Teandhjp0i
shown in Fig. 57. The hjp0idependence is very
weak. The lower bound on the normalized currentquench times corresponds to an average plasma
temperature between 5 and 3 eV. This average
temperature in turn corresponds to the lower limiton plasma temperature that is consistent withthe expected eects of impurity radiation coolingfrom low-Zimpurities, where radiation rates fall
dramatically at temperatures less than about 3 eV.
The lower limit on normalized quench rate is
obtained only when there are sucient impurities
present in the quench phase to bring T
edown to
3 eV. In contrast, in a situation where impurity
inﬂux (after the thermal quench) is insucient tocool the plasma to this minimum temperature, theresulting normalized quench times increase, and the‘mean’ of the experimental data, which correspondsto higher average temperature, is consistent withquench temperatures in the 10{20 eV range. We note
here, however, that the indications of temperature
presented in Fig. 57 and the temperatures discussedherein are indirect: future work to correlate theseinferred temperatures with direct measurements ofT
eandZeduring the quench phase of representa-
tive plasmas would conrm our modelling.Table 6 summarizes key machine and plasma
parameters and results from the database for cur-
rent quench analysis. The nal column shows the
estimated wall L=Rtime, and demonstrates that the
lower range of the current quench times obtainedin a given experiment are less than the charac-teristic times of surrounding structure. Therefore,the approximation made above about the eectiveplasma inductance is well justied for these data.On the other hand, the high end of the quench timerange in a given experiment is often greater than
the wall time, and the corresponding increase in the
eective inductance (plus possible attempted correc-tive action by the plasma current regulating systemor the presence of some runaway conversion) mayaccount for some of the very large normalized decaytimes that are present in the database.
4.2.3. Application to ITER and future needs
Straightforward application of thermal and cur-
rent quench data assembled in the IDDB yields esti-
mated thermal quench times in ITER of about 1 ms,delays between the rst and second thermal quenchof up to about 20 ms and minimum current quencht i m e so f5 0 m s( m a x i m u m dI=dt 450 MA s
−1).
This maximum current quench rate corresponds toan average plasma temperature of about 3 eV, whichis the minimum average plasma temperature consis-tent with impurity radiation cooling. ‘Typical’ fastcurrent quenches in ITER with somewhat higher
plasma temperature are probably more likely and
can be expected to have at least 100 ms duration.Much slower current quenches, with durations of upto 1 s (dI=dt =20 MA s
−1) are possible and need to
be considered with respect to the more severe VDEand halo current loading eects that a slower currentdecay and higher halo temperature can be expectedto produce.
The theoretical basis for the essential linear
extrapolation with plasma minor radius of thermalquench times from present experiments to ITERseems to be in reasonably good agreement with theexperimental data, but the quality and more system-atic compilation of the thermal quench data couldmerit future attention. Systematic data on the local-
ization of thermal quench energy loss to divertor
targets and/or other in-vessel surfaces is presentlysparse, and it is not yet possible to make very deni-tive predictions of how thermal energy deposition inan ITER class experiment will be localized on thedivertor targets and what the possible toroidal peak-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2335

--- Page 87 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Table 6. Machine and plasma parameters and analysis results for current quench
database
R0a Sm i n .tcq=Smin.tcqtwall
Tokamak (m) (m) (m2)( m s m−2) (ms) (ms)
Tore-Supra 2.3 0.75 1.0 1.77 2 3.5 7.5
JET 3.0 1.0 1.5 4.71 1.5 7.1 5C-Mod 0.68 0.22 1.6 0.243 1.7 0.4 6
ASDEX-Upgrade 1.65 0.5 1.6 1.26 1.1 1.4 13
JT-60U 3.3 0.9 1.4 3.56 0.8 2.8 20TFTR 2.5 0.9 1.0 2.54 1.2 3.0 10
DIII-D 1.7 0.6 1.8 2.04 1.0 2.0 10
ITER 8.14 2.8 1.6 39.4 0.8
321000
Extrapolation for ITER based on S−1dI=dt =0:8M Am−2ms−1.
ing or other asymmetry factors will be. While pro-
visional estimates for these quantities based on thelimited existing data have been developed for ITER,these estimates are accompanied by a recommenda-tion that the eects of the signicant uncertaintiesthat presently exist should be carefully examined.
The basis for prediction of the minimum current
q u e n c hd u r a t i o ni na nI T E Rc l a s se x p e r i m e n ta n d
the corresponding worst case estimates for the maxi-
mum expected direct EM loads on the in-vessel com-ponents seems to be sound and consistent with thepredictions of a simple radiation cooling model. Incontrast, prediction of the maximum, as opposed tominimum, current quench duration is less certain andwill, at a minimum, have to await development ofself-consistent predictive models for impurity gener-ation and inﬂux for VDE and halo current eects and
for possible runaway electron conversion. Discussion
of the considerations involved follows in Sections 4.4,4.6 and 4.7 of this chapter.
4.3. Vertical instability and halo currents
Vertical instability plays an important role in the
current quench phase of disruptions in verticallyelongated tokamaks and the resulting generation ofpoloidal current ﬂow (‘in-vessel halo currents’) inelectrically conducting in-vessel components givesrise to signicant local and global forces on the in-vessel and torus vessel systems of such tokamaks. In
a reactor scale experiment such as ITER, the esti-
mated maximum magnitudes of the in-vessel cur-rent and total vertical force are, respectively, about8 MA and 150 MN. Accommodation of this currentﬂow and the resulting EM forces become importantdesign considerations. Systematic documentation ofthe eects of vertical instability in present tokamaks
is essential to develop an understanding of how sucheects will extrapolate to an ITER class experiment.Vertical instability and the MHD ﬂuctuations thatare apparently associated with it also seem to playa pivotal role in determining whether runaway elec-
trons generated during the disruption current quench
are well enough conned that appreciable runawaycurrent conversion develops. This eect of verticalinstability is separately addressed in Section 4.4.
4.3.1. Vertical instability: causes and consequences
Since elongated plasmas are vertically unstable, a
suciently large and fast change in plasma param-eters (I
p,,li, and/or elongation, for example) can
cause a loss of vertical position control, leading to anuncontrolled upward or downward displacement ofthe plasma column and eventually to plasma contact
with structures at the top or bottom of the cham-
ber/rst wall/divertor. Such a scenario is a com-mon outcome of a major disruption in an elongatedcross-section tokamak. Figure 59 shows an exampleof a typical elongated plasma disruption in AlcatorC-Mod [279]. Vertically unstable disruptions withsimilar characteristics are observed in all presentlyoperating elongated cross-section divertor tokamaks,including ASDEX-Upgrade, COMPASS-D, DIII-D,JET and JT-60U.
The disruption process begins with a thermal
quench in which most of the plasma thermal energy
is rapidly lost through radiation and/or conductionto the divertor strike points (Section 4.2). The fastchanges in ,l
i, etc., which accompany the thermal
quench, lead to a loss of vertical position control. Inthe ensuing vertical displacement phase of the dis-
2336
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 88 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
t = 1.2129 1.2135 1.2141 1.2147 1.2153 1.2159 1.2165
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6Z (m)
0.5 0.7 0.9
R (m)0.75 MA 0.80 0.78 0.750.700.59
0.45
Shot 970528003
0.00.51.0Ip (MA)
-0.4-0.20.0Z centroid (m)
Halo current (MA)
1.210 1.212 1.214 1.216 1.218 1.2200.00.10.2
UpperLower
t (s)
Figure 59. Upper gure: magnetic ﬂux reconstructions at 0.6 ms intervals during a
disruption and subsequent vertical displacement in Alcator C-Mod. The arrows showthe poloidal projection of halo current ﬂow. The halo circuit in the plasma scrape o
actually follows a helical path, in order to be force free. Lower gure: plasma current,
vertical motion, and in-vessel halo currents in the upper and lower portions of the vacuumvessel wall. In this example of a downward going displacement, halo current in the upperportion of the vessel is essentially zero.
ruption, the plasma elongates (owing to the current
prole broadening and the decrease in lithat follows
the onset of the thermal quench) and moves rapidlydownwards, and eventually comes into full poloidalcontact with the lower portion of the plasma fac-ing rst wall and divertor entrance bae structures.Signicant poloidal current ﬂow in these structures
occurs in this displacement termination phase. Peakpoloidal currents in the example shown are about
200 kA, or roughly 25% of the initial before disrup-tion plasma current. This peak normalized currentmagnitude is both representative of what is typicallyseen in present tokamaks and what extrapolation ofpresent halo current data predicts as the likely upperbound on halo current magnitude for an ITER class
tokamak.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2337

--- Page 89 ---

ITER Physics Basis
The magnetic energy stored in the PF of the
plasma current decays on a slower time-scale than
that of the vertical motion, and usually the mag-
netic energy is not dissipated until the plasma con-tacts and terminates at the top or bottom of thechamber. Note in Fig. 59 that more than half of theinitial plasma current still remains in the last frame,where the plasma core (region of closed ﬂux surfaces)is localized almost within the divertor entrance, andwhere most of the plasma current ﬂow is now in thewall intersecting halo current SOL that surrounds
the core.
In addition to the preceding disruption produced
VDE scenario, it is also possible to lose vertical posi-tion control without a disruption thermal quench.Faults in the vertical position feedback control sys-tem (power supply failures, sensor failures, powersupply voltage/current limitations), running plas-mas with excessive elongations, or even large ELMs
can result in initiation of an uncontrolled verti-
cal displacement. The main dierence between thistype of VDE and a thermal quench initiated ‘ver-tical disruption’ is that the thermal quench andcurrent quench occur simultaneously. This type ofVDE can be termed a ‘hot plasma’ VDE to distin-guish it from a ‘cold plasma’ VDE or vertical dis-ruption in which thermal energy loss is essentiallycomplete before appreciable vertical motion devel-ops. Since modelling predicts that higher plasma
edge temperature will lead to higher halo current
fractions (see Section 4.7), hot plasma VDEs areexpected to have higher halo current fractions (seediscussion below) and halo current EM loadings.Hot plasma VDEs in a reactor plasma will alsohave plasma{wall interaction consequences (impurityrelease and wall melting and vaporization) that arenot present or appreciable in hot plasma VDEs inpresent experiments.
The direction of vertical disruptions in present sin-
gle null tokamaks is typically, but not universally,downwards, towards the divertor. Upwards (awayfrom the divertor) displacements after disruption aresometimes observed, particularly in disruptions inwhich full current prole broadening ( l
i!0:5)
is not obtained. Simulations of the initial dynamicsof disruptions with axisymmetric equilibrium mod-
els (see, for example, the model described in [280]
and also in Section 4.7 and the modelling describedin [281]) show that the direction of initial motionis determined by the competition of the equilibriummodifying eects of current prole broadening andpressure loss with the separate eect of the inducedtoroidal eddy currents in in-vessel and vessel struc-
tures that arise from the initial current decay. For
loss of control VDEs, the initial direction is usually
random.
Vertical control loss after disruption is not
inevitable. In rare instances (typically with lowerelongation plasmas and very fast current quenches),the after disruption plasma in Alcator C-Modremains in approximate vertical equilibrium and the
plasma motion is radially inward [279]. In these pas-
sively stable cases, halo currents appear mainly inthe inboard wall. A similar passive ‘neutral point’behaviour is obtained { with careful selection of theinitial pre-disruption vertical position { for moreelongated plasmas in JT-60U, and with optimiza-tion of the vertical position control algorithm, activecontrol of the plasma position after a thermal quenchcan be maintained for a wider range of plasma cong-urations and current decay rates [281]. In these ver-
tically stabilized disruptions, the halo currents seen
in the lower portion of the vessel in vertically unsta-ble disruptions are avoided. Plasma operation nearthe neutral point and with adequate vertical posi-tion control is a potential means for VDE and halocurrent avoidance in reactor tokamaks (see [281] andSection 4.6).
4.3.2. Halo currents
During a vertical disruption or a VDE, both
the plasma current and cross-sectional area (whichencloses toroidal ﬂux) decay to zero. Both decaysgenerate an electric eld that can drive current ﬂowalong the helical eld lines in the wall connected SOLregion of the plasma. This so-called ‘halo’ currentwas rst explicitly observed on JET [282] and DIII-D [283]. Indirect but compelling evidence for the exis-tence of halo currents was also obtained for verti-cally unstable disruptions in PBX-M [284], and halo
currents are now retrospectively understood to have
been responsible for what, at the time, were inex-plicable incidents of mechanical or attachment heat-ing damage to in-vessel components in early tokamakexperiments.
The halo current ﬂowing helically on wall inter-
secting plasma ﬂux surfaces makes a complete cir-
cuit by ﬂowing from the strike points at one end
of the open SOL eld lines, through the conduct-ing rst wall structures, and out onto the other endof the SOL eld lines. The poloidal projection ofthe halo current ﬂow is shown in the last frames ofthe upper part of Fig. 59. Measurements in Alcator
2338
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 90 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
C-Mod show that for downward going disruptions,
halo currents ﬂow only in the bottom portion of the
chamber, as shown in the lower part of Fig. 59, and
vice versa for upward going disruptions. In the rareinstances when a disrupting plasma remains at themidplane (usually for near circular plasmas), halocurrents are observed at the vessel midplane. Fig-ure 59 shows that the time of maximum halo cur-rent occurs around the time of maximum currentquench rate, and that the plasma is still carryingabout 60% of the initial plasma current even though
it has shrunk dramatically in size. The value of q
edge
at or near the last closed ﬂux surface is low and is
typically (within the approximations inherent in themagnetic reconstructions shown in Fig. 59) equal toor less than unity. Similar localization of the ter-minating plasma and near unity values of the coresafety factor obtained with a full Grad{Shafranovequilibrium reconstruction are found for the DIII-DVDE described in [283].
The poloidal halo current ﬂowing in the wall, when
crossed with the toroidal magnetic eld, gives riseto additional structural forces above and beyond
the well understood toroidal or saddle eddy cur-
rent forces induced during disruptions. Experimen-tal measurements and numerical simulations onASDEX-Upgrade [285] and DIII-D [282] have shownthat the forces associated with halo currents are amajor contributor to the vertical force acting on thetorus vessel during a disruption. Representative datafrom ASDEX-Upgrade are shown in Fig. 60. Esti-mates of the eective radial width  r
efor the in-
vessel halo current ﬂow path derived from such data
show that the eective width is comparable to theinitial plasma minor radius. These width estimatesconrm the localization and estimated width at max-imum displacement derived from magnetic recon-structions of the type shown in Fig. 59.
4.3.3. Vertical forces
The global magnitude of the total vertical force
produced during a vertical disruption or a VDE canbe estimated on a very simple basis from the plasmadestabilizing force
F
Z;max 0:7I0Zmax@Br;eq(Zmax)
@Z(14)
whereI0is the pre-disruption or pre-VDE plasma
current,@Br;eq=@Zis the radial equilibrium eld
gradient evaluated at the location  Zmaxof max-
imum plasma column displacement (typically near-400-300-200-1000
0 500 1000 1500 2000Shots 7200-8650
Ih,max BT (kA·T)Fz,V (kN)Ramp-up
Flat-topRamp-down
Leff = 0.5 m 0.25 m0.125 m
Figure 60. Measured vertical disruption forces in
ASDEX-Upgrade compared with the product of max-imum halo current (measured) and toroidal eld. Themean slope of the data implies an eective in-vessel halocurrent ﬂow length of about 0.4 m ( 0:8a
0). The toroidal
conductivity of nearby in-vessel components is negligible,so in this case, halo current provides the entire verticalstabilizing force on the plasma.
the top or bottom of the in-vessel structure), and
the numerical factor of 0.7 is chosen to reﬂect the
experimental observation that the plasma current atmaximum displacement is typically about two thirdsof the initial current. Applying Eq. (14) for typ-ical ITER parameters with I
p0=2 1 M Ag i v e sa
maximum vertical force of about 150 MN (15000 t).Since the plasma must be in force balance, the total
vertical force developed on the in-vessel and vessel
systems by toroidal and poloidal eddy currents andby in-vessel halo currents cannot exceed this value.Comparison of the force estimated by Eq. (14) witheither mechanical measurements of the actual ver-tical force or estimates of the I
h;maxBTreforce
derived from in-vessel halo current measurementsand knowledge of the halo current ﬂow geometryconrms that the expected in-vessel/vessel vertical
forces are obtained and are in good agreement with
corresponding plasma destabilizing forces.
While estimates of the maximum vertical force
derived from Eq. (14) can provide a good basis for thedesign of the vessel support system in future toka-maks, in order to specify the engineering design con-
straints on the rst wall for reactor tokamaks, the
magnitude and in-vessel distribution of the halo cur-rent needs to be specied. To this end, the ITERExpert Group on Disruptions, Plasma Control andMHD has compiled a database of disruption infor-mation, including halo current measurements, from
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2339

--- Page 91 ---

ITER Physics Basis
a number of present day tokamaks (see Section 4.2
and [275,278]). The magnitude of the maximum halo
current is the rst design consideration. As shown in
Fig. 61, for ITER relevant elongations in the rangeof 1.5{2.0, the peak halo current ( I
h;max) seen in
present tokamaks can range between about 1% and50% of the pre-disruption plasma current ( I
p0).
The large amount of scatter in the maximum
halo current data within a single experiment andwithin the database as a whole suggests that thereare one or more underlying ‘hidden variables’ inthe data set. However, systematic analysis [275] ofthe database in terms of the elongation and/or q
95
sensitivity has failed to show any clear systematic
multi-machine dependence on these parameters oron plasma size of current or on after-disruption ‘coldplasma’ VDEs versus comparable loss-of-control ‘hotplasma’ VDEs. While there are clearly discerniblesystematic I=q
95and/orIp=BTdependences in the
Alcator C-Mod data [279], these same dependencesare not as clearly evident in the remainder of thedatabase. For the database contributions in whicha signicant range of elongations is present there is
also no explicit elongation ( 
x) dependence for nor-
malized halo current magnitude, except for obviouscases where the elongation is insucient to result invertical instability. Selecting 
x1:5 removes these
vertically stable cases from the database.
The higher maximum halo current fraction ob-
served in ASDEX-Upgrade (up to 50% as contrastedwith 30{40% in other experiments) stands out in theoverall database and is probably the result of the lackof appreciable vertical stabilizing eect from inducedtoroidal currents (the saddle connected vertical sta-bilizing structure in ASDEX-Upgrade is ineective
for vertically displaced plasmas). If this aspect of
the ASDEX-Upgrade data is taken into account, themaximum normalized halo current fraction that canbe inferred from Fig. 61 is about 40%, and the major-ity of the data lies below about 30%. The upperbound of the halo current fraction recommendedfor ITER design is 40% (8 MA for I
p0=2 1 M A )
[278].
The measurements in Fig. 61 have been assembled
from tokamaks of many dierent minor radii (0.16{1.25 m). At the present time, understanding of the
variance in the data is not yet adequate to deter-
mine whether or not halo current fraction dependson machine size, but the JET and JT-60U data inFig. 61, and more recently reported measurementsof halo current magnitude in JET [286{288] and fur-ther magnitude data from JT-60U [289], increasinglysuggest that larger machines have a normalized max-
imum halo current fraction ( I
h;max=Ip0)t h a td o e s
not exceed about 25%.
If this lower bound on maximum current fraction
continues to ITER, it will have modestly favourabledesign implications. There is some support from themodelling of ITER halo currents in dynamic axisym-metric equilibrium simulations (developed with the
model described in [280], see Section 4.7 for a fur-
ther presentation) that show that the normalizedcurrent fraction for credible plasma edge (halo) tem-peratures will not exceed about 25%. We also notethat for ITER taking 25% normalized halo currentand r
e0:8a0= 2 m yields FZ;halo80 MN, or
only about half the expected total maximum ver-tical force. Simulations of ITER VDEs developedby R. Sayer and S. Jardin, in which the modelling
parameters are adjusted to produce 25% maximum
halo current, indicate that the total vertical forcegenerated (including the force from toroidal eddycurrents, which are appreciable for ITER) will beabout 120 MN. Our point here is not to introducethe use of simulations for design (this is discussedin Section 4.7), but rather to demonstrate that thepresently estimated ‘large tokamak’ halo currentmagnitude bound of 25% I
p0, the expected plasma
localization and vertical position for a downward
going VDE inferred from the reconstruction data of
the type presented in Fig. 59, and the estimated max-imum vertical force inferred from Eq. (14), all leadto a self-consistent picture of the maximum forcesand axisymmetric halo current eects that can beexpected for a typical ‘worst case’ downward goingVDE in ITER or in a comparable reactor tokamak.
4.3.4. Halo current distribution, toroidal
asymmetries, and lateral loads
While the upper bound on the expected collec-
tive vertical force on in-vessel and vessel systemscan (subject to some uncertainty about the magni-tude of the plasma current at maximum displace-ment) be estimated from the elementary considera-tions embodied in Eq. (14), and the expected mag-nitude of the maximum expected halo current canbe derived from empirical analysis of the halo cur-
rent database, evaluation of local forces and stresses
in the vessel chamber/rst wall/divertor requiresknowledge of the toroidal and poloidal distributionof in-vessel halo currents. Here, in-vessel measure-ments and magnetic reconstructions in a number oftokamaks have shown:
2340
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 92 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
0.1 1.0 10.00.00.00.11.0Ih,max (MA)
Ip0 (MA)0.01
0.001Ih,max/Ip0 = 0.70      0.50        0.30                            0.10
JET 1.5-1.6
JET 1.6-1.7
JET 1.7-1.8
JET 1.8-1.9
JET 1.9-2.0ASDEX-U 1.6
JT60U 1.5-1.6C-MOD.96 1.5-1.6
C-MOD.96 1.6-1.7
C-MOD.96 1.7-1.8
C-MOD 1.8-1.9
C-MOD 1.9-2.0
C-MOD 1.5-1.6
C-MOD 1.6-1.7
C-MOD 1.7-1.8
DIII-D 1.6-1.7
DIII-D 1.8-1.9
DIII-D 1.9-2.0ASDEX-U.96 1.5-1.6
ASDEX-U.96 1.6-1.7
ASDEX-U.96 1.7-1.8
COMPASS-D 1.6Device and kx range
Halo Current Data Base 27.11.96 (1.5 < kx < 2.0)
Figure 61. Peak total halo current ( Ih;max) versus pre-disruption plasma current ( Ip0) for disruptions
in various elongated tokamaks. The data are for plasmas with vertical elongation 1 :5x2:0, where
xis the elongation at the separatrix.
(1) that the poloidal width of the halo region is
relatively narrow (0 :2a0{0:3a0)a n dr e m a i n s
approximately constant as the vertical dis-placement proceeds and the closed ﬂux surfaceplasma core radius decreases; and
(2) that there are signicant toroidal asymmetries
present.
These asymmetries have important design implica-
tions, since they result in toroidal peaking of the in-vessel halo current ﬂow and jBforce, and, as ele-
mentary analysis shows, a net radially directed side-ways or lateral loading on the in-vessel/vessel sys-
tem. Lateral displacement of the JET vacuum vessel
has been observed in certain JET VDEs [286,288].Lateral loadings are an important design issue forreactor tokamaks, since most previously proposedsolutions for support of in-vessel and vessel sys-tems have not explicitly addressed the possibility ofsuch loads. The mechanical problem is signicant in
both present and future tokamaks: the lateral loadsinferred for a 3.5 MA JET VDE are 2M Na n d a
simpleI
pBTRscaling of this value to ITER yields
lateral loads of 50 MN.
Measurements of the toroidal symmetry of halo
currents in the six tokamaks contributing to theIDDB give typical toroidal peaking factors (TPF,dened as ratio of maximum halo current densityto toroidally averaged halo current density) inthe range of 1.2{2, although there are also somedata with TPF greater than 3. An example of thetoroidal distribution and temporal behaviour of
halo currents in a typical Alcator C-Mod vertical
disruption [279] is shown in Fig. 62. A basic n=1
structure of the toroidal distribution is clearlyseen. There is also evidence of higher- nmodes
and dynamic variation of the ne structure of thecurrent distribution within the time-scale of the halo
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2341

--- Page 93 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Figure 62. Halo current density measured at 10 toroidal locations around the Alcator C-Mod
divertor. Left: a relatively peaked ‘lament’ of halo current is seen to rotate twice around the torus.
Right: the same data plotted in a dierent manner, showing the predominantly n=1s t r u c t u r eo f
the toroidal asymmetry.
current pulse. Furthermore, in C-Mod this structure
is usually seen to rotate toroidally at frequencies ofthe order of 1 kHz. This rotation rules out rst wallnon-uniformities as the cause of the asymmetry.
Detailed measurements of the spatial structure
in C-Mod show that the halo current ﬂow in thevessel structure is purely poloidal. This implies thatthe wall intersecting eld lines carrying the halocurrent must make an integer number of toroidaltransits in going from the entrance strike point to
the exit strike point (typically one toroidal transit
in C-Mod [279]). This suggests that there may bea resonance condition for halo current ﬂow thatinvolves the eld line helicity. Depending upon thegeometry of contact, this also implies that q
edge
has to be between 1 and 2. This is consistent with
the previous observation derived from magneticreconstruction concerning the low ( 1) plasma core
safety factor in the last frame of Fig. 59.
Rotation of the halo current asymmetry is not
observed on all machines, or even on all disruptions
in a single machine. In general, non-rotating asym-metries are observed in larger machines. The obser-vation of low (near unity) edge qin the nal max-
imum displacement phase of the current decay is,however, universal, as is the presence of some degreeof ann= 1 structure. For moderate asymmetries,
1TPF2, the resulting azimuthal dependence of
the toroidal distribution can be described to a rea-sonable approximation as jj
o(1+sintor), where
toris the toroidal coordinate.
For cases with TPF = 2, then=1s t r u c t u r e
is increasingly modied by higher- nharmonics that
reﬂect localization of the in-vessel halo current ina relatively small fraction of the full torus circum-ference. The resulting distribution of halo currentapproaches a toroidally localized peak or ‘lament’
with low or zero current elsewhere. Figure 63 shows
an example of a high TPF halo current distributionobtained in an Alcator C-Mod disruption at timesnear the halo current magnitude peak [279]. Thecalculated TPF for the three times varies between2.5 and 3.8 and the halo current is localized withinapproximately three of the ten equally spaceddivertor support structure modules. While detailedevidence for the exact degree of toroidal localization
in present tokamaks is somewhat limited by the
nite toroidal number and resolution of in-vesselhalo current measurements, the possibility of arelatively high toroidal localization of in-vessel halocurrent in reactor tokamak VDEs is a design aspectthat must be taken into consideration.
2342
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 94 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
1 1 2345678910-1001020304050
Toroidal Position (divertor sector #, 36  divisions)Divertor Sector Current (kA)
Interpolated data   200 ms
TPF = 2.48
  100 ms
TPF = 2.74
    0 ms
TPF = 3.75
Figure 63. Halo currents in the Alcator C-Mod diver-
tor structure (ten electrically isolated decants) at three100s intervals near the time of maximum halo current.
Halo current at a given time is largely localized withinfour of the ten decants. The TPF varies between 2.5 and3.8. The distribution rotates toroidally at a frequency of1.4 kHz
4.3.5. Toroidal peaking factor
Information on the toroidal peaking of halo cur-
rents in a number of tokamaks has been assembledas part of the ITER disruption database (see Sec-tion 4.2), as shown in Fig. 64. It is apparent that thehigher peaking factors tend to be seen only at lowernormalized halo currents. A hyperbolic relationshipcan be used to dene a bounding curve, which can
then be used for engineering design guidance. The
curves shown in the Fig. 64 for ( I
h;max=Ip0)TPF =
0:75 and (Ih;max=Ip0)TPF = 0:50 have, respectively,
been recommended as ‘worst case’ and ‘typical max-imum’ bounds for ITER halo current magnitude[285].
There is some theoretical justication for this
hyperbolic bound that derives from semi-empirical
models that explain the n= 1 character of the in-
vessel current asymmetry on the basis of the inter-action of an n=1 ,m= 1 helically deformed plasma
column with an axisymmetric conducting shell [290].Toroidally non-uniform contact of the halo region ofthe deformed plasma gives rise to the n=1v a r i -
ation of the shell halo current, and variation in thedegree of contact during the VDE evolution gives riseto an inverse correlation of halo current magnitude
and TPF that is qualitatively similar to the bounds
of the data in Fig. 64. The addition of higher ordern=mmodes to the deformation could explain both
the toroidal localization that occurs at higher TPFand the dynamic ne structures that are visible inthe data in Fig. 62.A similar explanation of the n= 1 character of
the asymmetry and an estimate of the lateral vessel
force measured in JET can be obtained for a plasma
that is tilted and/or radially displaced with respectto the JET vessel shell [287,288]. Measurements ofthe axial and radial position of the plasma cross-section in JET at various toroidal locations duringtoroidally asymmetric VDEs conrm the existenceof a non-rotating tilted and/or deformed plasmain cases where appreciable sideways displacementof the vessel system is observed. The measured
maximum tilt displacements (dierence in plasma
axis height on opposite sides of the torus) are about0.15 m, or 15% of the nominal minor radius.
There is also an 0.02 m o centre shift of the
plasma torus axis relative to the vessel torus axis.There are also indications that higher- nor higher-m
plasma deformations are present. Finally, analysisof the electromechanical loading expected for thistype of tilted plasma and the measured mechanicalresponse of the torus and torus support system are
found to be in reasonably good agreement.
The development of an n=1 ,m= 1 ‘external’
kink instability at the q= 1 termination phase of a
vertical disruption or VDE is an obvious candidatefor explanation of the toroidal asymmetries seenin present experiments, and modelling of such a
deformed plasma with a three dimensional MHD
equilibrium code would provide a quantitativebasis for both interpretation of present plasmadisplacement and halo current data and for theprediction of halo current asymmetries and vesselforces in future tokamaks. However, clear measure-ments of a helically deformed or tilted plasma inexperiments other than JET remain to be obtained,and modelling of a helically deformed plasma with
halo currents in self-consistent equilibrium with an
axisymmetric conducting shell remains as a futurechallenge to the MHD equilibrium and stabilitymodelling community.
4.3.6. Extrapolation to ITER and open issues
The halo current and VDE design basis rec-
ommended for ITER are maximum vertical andlateral forces of 150 MN and 50 MN, respectively,
I
h;max=Ip00:4(0.25 typically), 1 :2TPF4
and (Ih;max=Ip0)TPF 0:75 (0.50 typically) [278].
These guidelines have intentionally been set to deneworst case limits and there is a possibility that theycan be relaxed in the future if the present hints ofan advantageous scaling of halo current magnitude
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2343

--- Page 95 ---

ITER Physics Basis
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.70.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
Ih,max/Ip0*TPF Toroidal Peaking Factor (TPF)
Normalized Maximum Halo Current (I h,max/Ip0)Extrapolated I h,max/Ip0
at q95 = 3 (mean+2s)
JET
JT-60U
C-MODCOMPASS-D ASDEX-U (6.96)DIII-DC-MOD
C-MODC-MOD
C-MOD
C-MOD(96)
C-MOD(96)
DIII-D
ASDEX-U(96)ASDEX-U
ASDEX-U
ASDEX-U
COMPASS-D
0.75
0.50
Halo Current Database 27.11.96 (1.5 < kx < 2.0) 0.75
0.50
Figure 64. Toroidal peaking of halo currents in various tokamaks, for plasmas with
1:5x2. High peaking factors occur only at low halo current fraction. The hyperbolic
curves show limiting bounds for the data. The bounds in the various tokamaks on thenormalized maximum halo current at q
95= 3, derived from the data in Fig. 61, are also
shown.
and/or asymmetry with machine size turn out to be
well supported. We note parenthetically here thatwhile these halo current design requirements appearformidable, assessments of the ability of the ITERdesign to accommodate the resulting worst casestructural loadings show that these requirementscan, in fact, be satised with adequate engineering
margins. However, there is obvious future benet
in being able to rene and relax these requirementsand to improve understanding of the degree towhich disruptions and VDEs in ITER will lead to adistribution of loading conditions rather than worstcase limits. Better specication of such ‘statistical’aspects of disruption and VDE loading may becomerelevant to future regulatory assessments of reactortokamak functional and structural integrity in
normal and ‘o normal’ operation conditions.The question of the possible tokamak size scal-
ing of the maximum halo current fraction is oneof the principal remaining uncertainties. In addi-tion, the reasons for why there is such a widerange of maximum halo current and asymmetryfor a given equilibrium are not well understood,nor is the possible dependence of such parameters
on vessel/divertor structural geometry in the con-
tact region and other machine specic parameters.Recommendations for resolving these issues are toexpand upon the integrated modelling, both axisym-metric and non-axisymmetric, that has been car-ried out so far (see Section 4.7), and to continuewith experimental measurements of halo currents,particularly in the larger tokamaks. In this lat-ter regard it will be important to have as exten-
sive an array of in-vessel halo current diagnostics
2344
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 96 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
as possible (full poloidal and toroidal coverage of
rst wall currents in existing experiments is limited
to at least some degree, and in-vessel component
halo current ﬂow paths are not always fully instru-mented), and to attempt to make more denitive cor-relations among non-axisymmetric plasma displace-ment measurements, halo current asymmetries andin situ measurements of forces and/or stresses in
vessel components. This recommendation extends toITER itself: a comprehensive set of plasma congu-ration, in-vessel halo current and in-vessel and vessel
structural response diagnostics is recommended (see
Chapter 7).
4.4. Runaway electron formation, loss
and wall interaction
The generation of signicant levels of superther-
mal multi-MeV runaway electrons following onset ofplasma disruption is a well known eect in toka-maks, and persistent after disruption runaway cur-
rents with magnitudes up to about half of the pre-
disruption plasma current are seen in certain circum-stances, usually at low plasma densities, in manypresent experiments, including TFTR [291], Tore-Supra [292], JET [293] and JT-60U [294]. The sub-sequent loss of these initially well conned runawaycurrents to plasma facing surfaces (typically the lim-iter) leads to intense hard X-ray generation, photo-neutron activation of the impacted surfaces and, insome cases, localized surface damage, erosion or com-
ponent failure. Figure 65 shows representative data
for runaway conversion following a low density dis-ruption in JET. Approximately half of the initialplasma current converts to runaway current. Highcurrent reactor tokamaks such as ITER are theoret-ically expected to be susceptible to similar runawaycurrent conversion even at high density following dis-ruption [295,296], onset of the current collapse phaseof a loss of control VDE (see Section 4.3), or use of
pellet injection fast plasma power and current shut-
down (see Section 4.5 and [297]).
Wholesale runaway conversion is a potentially
important design issue for reactor tokamaks, sincepresent understanding of runaway loss and wallinteraction shows that the plasma facing surface
energy deposition levels that arise when the run-
aways ultimately reach the rst wall can be very high(see below), and hence questions of the long termendurance and integrity of the at-risk surfaces arise.For this reason, it is important to understand boththe physics basis of runaway formation, loss and wallinteraction in both present and reactor scale toka-
maks, and to quantify the possibilities for runaway
conversion avoidance and/or deposition eect ame-
lioration in reactor tokamaks. Furthermore, since thedominant mechanism by which runaways are gener-ated in reactor tokamaks is not signicant in presentexperiments, physics understanding of the underly-ing loss and wall interaction mechanisms { particu-larly the eects of MHD ﬂuctuations { is critical tobeing able to project runaway formation and loss,interaction and damage eects to the reactor/ITER
regime.
Soft X ray intensity (kW/m2)
Hard X ray intensity (arbitrary units)
Loop voltage (V)
Plasma current (MA)2
1
100
0
1.5
1.0JET pulse No. 13340
0
0100
10.20 10.25 10.30
Time (s)
Figure 65. Plasma disruption leading to runaway con-
version in JET (Ref. [293]). Loss of plasma thermal
energy (fall in soft X-ray emission), onset of runawayconversion (current plateau at 1 MA), and subsequentonset of quasi-continuous runaway losses (indicated bysustained hard X-ray emission) are shown. Equilibriumcontrol is maintained following conversion, and the 1 MArunaway discharge persists for several seconds. Note sup-pression of the current waveform zero.
4.4.1. Knock-on avalanche production of runaways
High current tokamaks such as ITER may be sub-
ject to the production of large numbers of runaway
electrons during disruptions. The basic issue for run-away production in large tokamaks is that knock-on secondary electrons, which can also run away,lead to an exponential buildup of runaway currentj
RA[295{297] with growth rate γRA,g i v e n ,t og o o d
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2345

--- Page 97 ---

ITER Physics Basis
accuracy, by [298]:
1
jRA@jRA
@t=1
RAln rγ
3(Z+5 )E
Ec−1

1−Ec
E+4(Z+1 )2
3γ(Z+5 ) (E2=E2c+4=γ2−1)−1=2
:
(15)
Here,Eis the toroidal electric eld,
γ=( 1+1:46p
r=R+1:72r=R)−1
is the neoclassical conductivity factor, ln  is the
Coulomb logarithm, Zis the eective charge of the
main plasma, RA=mc=eEc,
Ec=4e3ne
mc2ln =0:12ne;20[Vm−1] (16)
is the electric eld necessary to balance the drag at
the electron energy mc2[299,300], and ne;20is the
electron density in units of 1020m−3.G r o w t hr a t e s
projected using Eq. (15) for typical ITER parametersduring the current decay phase { where densities areprojected to be a few times 10
20m−3and whereE
Ec{ are in the range 100 γRA(s−1)1000.
Equation (15) describes the growth rate given by a
t to Fokker{Planck theory that is valid in the regionof positive growth rate. For elds smaller than thecritical value given in Eq. (16), i.e. for E<E
c,t h e r e
are no new runaways and existing runaways gradu-ally slow down. This classical slowing down processis, however, relatively slow (1{10 s) in a reactor toka-mak, and, hence, cannot be depended upon (withoutenhancement) to provide benign (without wall con-tact) runaway current dissipation.
Equation (16) implies that if runaways are to be
unconditionally avoided during the current quench
phase of a disruption, the electron density must bequite high
n
e;20=10
2RΨ

where Ψ is the poloidal ﬂux available during the
current quench ( 100 Wb in ITER), and is the
current quench time. For the 0.1{1.0 s range ofdisruption initiated current quench times expectedin ITER (see Section 4.2), an after disruption
densityn
e;20= 20{200 is required for unconditional
runaway avoidance. It is unlikely that densities inthis range will occur naturally during disruptions.If densities of this magnitude are obtainable at all,the most likely means for attaining them appearsto be injection of massive amounts ( 0.1 kg) ofdeuterium in the form of multiple solid pellets or as
a liquid jet [297]. These aspects of the unconditional
runaway avoidance issue for ITER are further
d i s c u s s e db e l o wa n da l s oi nS e c t i o n4 . 5 .
At present, evidence for the importance of the
knock-on avalanche process in reactor tokamaks isbased largely upon the avalanche theory embodiedin Eq. (15) and the underlying premise that therunaways are well conned during the avalanchingprocess. With regard to verifying the predictions ofEq. (15) by means of data obtained in present toka-maks, it is not easy to compare present experimen-tal results on runaway production with the theory,
since the corresponding avalanche growth rates are
small ( 1s
−1), there may be competing MHD ﬂuc-
tuation or other loss mechanisms present (see dis-cussion below), and the Dreicer source of runaways{ the dominant source in present tokamaks { dependsexponentially on parameters such as plasma tem-perature and electric eld. Thus, meaningful com-parisons require, at a minimum, careful measure-ments with high time resolution temperature anddensity prole diagnostics during disruptions, and
also, ideally, direct measurement of the evolution of
the actual runaway content of the plasma.
Such in-plasma runaway measurements are only
now becoming possible, and present data on thedetails of runaway formation are still sparse. None-theless, qualitative and quantitative trends are inagreement with prediction, with modest avalanchingbeing seen in the current ﬂat-top phase of low densityTEXTOR discharges (Fig. 66) [301] and also follow-ing disruption in TEXTOR [302]. More recently, theanticipated eect of Z
eon avalanche growth rate
[303] has been explicitly conrmed during current
ﬂat-top in TEXTOR. We note here, parenthetically,
that synchrotron radiation emission measurements(made at infrared wavelengths) of the in-plasmarunaway content of TEXTOR discharges have beeninstrumental in being able to assess runaway produc-tion in a quantitative manner. Infrared indicationsof in-plasma runaways have also been seen in JT-60U [304]. The need to have this type of diagnosticto monitor runaway content in future reactor toka-
m a k sa n di nI T E Ri sv e r yc l e a r .
If the no runaway condition is violated and E
E
c, it can be seen from Eq. (15) that the number
of e-foldings of runaway current, N, is proportional
to the available magnetic ﬂux and, hence, the initialplasma current. The number of e-foldings is roughlyN2:5I
p(MA): this result shows both the limited
role that avalanching has in present tokamaks (and,
2346 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 98 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
IR intensity (arbitrary units)
ne (1019 m-3)123
012 3 40
Time (s)
Figure 66. Avalanche production of runaways dur-
ing the ﬂat-top phase of a low density TEXTOR dis-charge (from Ref. [301]): synchrotron emission intensity(infrared wavelengths, = 3{8m) and plasma line aver-
age density. The initial quasi-exponential growth of run-away content (indicated by the IR intensity) and subse-quent reduction in growth rate following a plasma den-sity increase are evident. The synchrotron radiation spec-trum shows that the maximum runaway energy is about
20 MeV.
hence, the need for careful experiments to observe
the avalanche eect), and the critical point that it islarger future tokamaks that are primarily at risk, aswas rst pointed out in [296]. For ITER, the expo-nentiation predicted by Eq. (15) is suciently highthat even such minute seed sources for initial run-aways such as Compton electrons produced by X-rayemission from walls or electrons from tritium decaycan multiply to convert the initial 21 MA of ther-
mal current to 15 MA of runaway current (Fig. 67).
A tt h es a m et i m e ,t h ef a s tg r o w t ho fr u n a w a y sl i m -its their average energy. The energy spectrum of therunaway electrons produced by avalanche is close toexponential, f(E)/exp(−E=E
0) with a relatively
low average electron energy of E10{15 MeV. This
low energy has been conrmed in TEXTOR [301].
4.4.2. Magnetic ﬂuctuation losses
Equation (15) has been well veried by Fokker{
Planck and Monte-Carlo simulations and is sup-ported by the TEXTOR experimental data, and onthis basis we can claim that the theory of runawayformation is fairly secure as long as good ﬂux sur-Time (ms)0 10050 150 200 250 300Current (MA)
Plasma (thermal + runaway)
Torus wall
Runaway1020
015
5
Figure 67. R u n a w a yc o n v e r s i o ni nas i m u l a t e dI T E R
‘disruption’ (actually a fast plasma shutdown obtainedwith 1% Xe injection, Ref. [297]). The initial rate of
thermal current decay corresponds to 300 ms decay
time. Onset of appreciable avalanche growth at 100 ms(I12 MA) results in the prompt conversion of the
remaining plasma current to runaway current. The nalmagnitude of current conversion is only weakly sensitiveto assumptions about the initial seed runaway number,initial current quench rate and so forth.
faces are present. However, the extent to which good
(or suciently good) ﬂux surfaces are present dur-
ing disruption is an open question and an issue that
assumes critical importance for predicting runawayproduction in reactor tokamaks. Here, the experiencein present experiments with regard to ﬂux surfaceintegrity and the eects of MHD ﬂuctuations duringdisruption varies depending on both the disruptionphase and the details of the current quench. It is clearthat plasma core ﬂux surfaces are globally destroyedduring the thermal quench phase, but apparently re-heal to some degree following the ensuing onset of
current prole broadening and the start of current
quench (see Section 4.1). A positive plasma currentspike is normally observed at the start of the currentquench, and high frequency magnetic perturbationsthat indicate the presence of global chaotic internalMHD activity (with corresponding degradation ofﬂux surfaces) have maximum amplitude at this time.
Depending on the current quench details, these
ﬂuctuations can persist or decay away, and the level
of ﬂuctuations is found to aect runaway genera-tion in present experiments. In JT-60U, immedi-ate rise of runaway electron content is observedat the start of current quench only for low mag-netic ﬂuctuations [294]. For runaways generated at
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2347

--- Page 99 ---

ITER Physics Basis
the later phase of the current quench, the thresh-
old amplitude of magnetic ﬂuctuations (normalized
by the toroidal magnetic eld) for runaway gener-
ation increases with increasing current quench rate[304,305] (Fig. 68), and a runaway current tail is notobserved for low toroidal magnetic eld (e.g. B<
2:2 T). A similar toroidal eld eect is seen in Tore-
Supra: photoneutrons (evidence of high energy run-away losses) are only rarely detected below 2 T [292].In order to understand this behaviour, more detailedmeasurements and understanding of the causes and
magnitude of magnetic ﬂuctuations during the cur-
rent quench under ITER conditions (especially withVDEs, see Sections 4.3 and 4.5) are needed to pro-vide input to runaway modelling.
00.20.40.60.81.01.2
0 50 100 150Br,n=1/Bo (10-3)~BT= 2.5-3 Tno REs
REs, no tailREs, tailwith DCWw/o  DCW
 no REs
IDCW =14 kA
BT  = 2.5 T
dI/dt (MA/s)
Figure 68. Runaway generation in JT-60U versus nor-
malized ﬂuctuation amplitude and current quench rate(from Ref. [304]). In the shaded region, no runaways areobserved either with or without excitation of the DCW(external helical eld) coil. Use of the DCW expands therunaway free domain (see mitigation discussion in text
below).
In present experiments, fast plasma shutdown
(‘killer’) pellet injection experiments frequently
produce transient runaway bursts (see Section 4.5)
during the time of the pellet ablation. Such burstsare obtained in experimental situations whereotherwise similar normal (non-injection) disruptionsdo not produce detectable runaways. The directcorrelation of such runaway generation with pelletinjection suggests that local eects associated with
the pellet ablation may play a role. Recent DIII-D
experiments [306] suggest that mixing of the high
energy thermal electron tails from the hot region infront of the pellet with the cold (and high electriceld) region behind the pellet could provide a strongseed source of runaways. Disruptions provide asimilar mixing, but also bring with them an accom-panying MHD ﬂuctuation loss mechanism that canmitigate subsequent runaway acceleration. Hence,these experimental results suggest that runaway
electrons are generated for adequate ﬂux surfaces
during the current quench, and the ergodization ofthe ﬂux has the possibility to avoid and/or mitigatethe runaway electron generation.
Present understanding of the eect of ﬂuctua-
tions is largely empirical and how to extrapolate
the data to the reactor knock-on avalanche regime
is open to question. Here, there is urgent need fora full three dimensional MHD code that can calcu-late non-axisymmetric eld structures and the con-sequent eect on runaway buildup. As yet such acode does not exist. However, a new code [307] hasbeen developed that can calculate runaway orbits fora given perturbed eld. This code is capable of cal-culating the three dimensional collisionless electronmotion in a plasma with stochastic magnetic elds
generated by perturbations (islands) with dierent
poloidal and toroidal mode numbers. Preliminaryresults show that three dimensional chaotic magneticperturbations cause collisionless loss even for lowenergy electrons ( 100 eV) owing to the violation
of the momentum conservation in the toroidal direc-tion. These results suggest that magnetic perturba-tions can provide an eective mechanism to avoidrunaway electron generation just after the energy
quench at the major disruption and the sudden drop
of the electron temperature at the killer pellet injec-tion [294] (see Section 4.5). However, it will be neces-sary to conrm this premise by a self-consistent threedimensional MHD calculation of the expected per-turbed elds. Optimally, ﬂuctuations will occur earlyenough and with sucient magnitude to prevent run-away buildup. However, the MHD and tearing sta-bility of a runaway discharge needs to be studiedfurther. A somewhat dierent rational surface inner
layer structure is to be expected.
4.4.3. Other runaway loss mechanisms
Once runaway electrons are generated, their loss
will not be enhanced by small scale magnetic per-
2348
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 100 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
turbations owing to the phase averaging eect [308].
There are, however, additional mechanisms that
can produce loss or slowing down of otherwise
well conned runaways. These mechanisms are inaddition to the ‘classical’ frictional drag slowingdown of runaways for E<E
c. We will return to this
classical loss process shortly. Mechanisms that canpotentially contribute to additional runaway lossinclude the following.
4.4.3.1. Synchrotron radiation
Once the runaways are established, they lose
energy by synchrotron radiation owing to theirmotion around the torus in an orbit with a radiusR. This is a very slow process, with a long energy
loss time. It becomes a signicant loss mechanism
only for runaway energies of several hundred MeVand, hence, will not be important in the knock-onavalanche regime.
4.4.3.2. Toroidal eld ripple
Runways can be scattered by the toroidal eld rip-
ple [309], and this scattering leads to a small fraction
of the runaways being continuously lost to the ves-sel wall. A resonance between the electron gyrofre-quency and the fundamental ripple frequency canalso lead to larger synchrotron radiation losses and,thus, create an upper bound on runaway energy. Cal-culations of this process show that runaway interac-tion with the higher harmonics of the ripple eldcan lead to a further limitation on runaway energy.
However, the magnitude of this eect is very sensi-
tive to the ripple amplitude, which, for higher rippleharmonics, decays exponentially with distance fromthe toroidal eld coils. An energy limit of 270 MeVwas predicted for scattering from the second har-monic ripple in the ITER CDA design [310]. A simi-larly high limiting energy is expected for the presentITER design. Here again however, the energy limit-ing eect of the knock-on avalanche should make thisloss mechanism unimportant.
4.4.3.3. Synchrotron radiation owing
to scattering on ions
When runaway electrons are scattered, they
rapidly lose their energy by synchrotron radiation.This mechanism has been considered in JET as apossible mechanism to explain the observed 2 s run-away current decay [293]. The characteristic losstime may be expressed for electrons moving at anangleto a parallel magnetic eld as 
ES=3
108=γB42sin2(in seconds). Here, Bis the eld
in kG,isv=c,a n dγis the relativistic factor
[(1−(v=c)2]−1=2. Estimates of this eect for JET
(γ70, 2.7 T) showed that only modest scatter-
ing (0.05 rad) would be required to explain the
observed loss time. However, we note that estimatesdeveloped herein (below) suggest that a 2 s decay
may be consistent with purely ‘classical’ slowingdown, so that the evidence for the presence of ionscattering synchrotron losses in these JET experi-
ments can be debated. Estimates for ion scattering
losses in ITER ( γ
20, 6 T) for the same scatter-
ing angle was estimated for JET yield loss times ofabout 0.1 s. The corresponding losses are not signi-cant relative to the projected avalanche growth rates,but the ion scattering synchrotron loss process couldbe important in ITER in the after conversion phase.
4.4.3.4. Instabilities
Beam plasma instabilities are not expected in the
cold post thermal quench plasma due to collisionalstabilization of the relevant hybrid mode [311]. How-ever, recent computational and theoretical studies[312,313] have shown that owing to the neoclassicalmodication of the growth rate shown in Eq. (15), a
natural peaking of the runaway current occurs. This
concentration generates perhaps 1{2 MA in a 20 cmradius, and might produce runaway current channelsawtoothing (or a radial lamentation owing to thebeam plasma mode) whose eect on the eld struc-ture needs to be considered.
When a large toroidal electric eld is present, the
loss mechanisms noted above can have some eectduring the acceleration of runaways. However, onceall of the current tail is driven by runaway electronsand an externally applied electric eld is absent, thein-plasma toroidal electric eld decreases to a magni-
tude that is E
c, as may be seen from consideration
of the electron momentum balance equation. In theabsence of additional loss mechanisms, using Eq. (16)to relateE
cto the plasma density yields a runaway
current plateau phase loop voltage for a pure hydro-gen plasma that is given by
V
RA0:75R(m)ne;20 (17)
and a characteristic runaway current decay time of
RA0:9IRA(MA)=ne;20: (18)
In Eq. (18), we have taken the eective inductance of
the runaway plasma to be half the free space induc-tance ( 
0R) that would apply in the absence of
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2349

--- Page 101 ---

ITER Physics Basis
the PF coil system. This approximation introduces
an uncertainty of about a factor of 2 in Eq. (18).
For the 1 MA JET runaway example illustrated in
Fig. 65, where the after conversion plasma electrondensity is estimated to be 2 10
19m−3[293],
Eqns (17) and (18), respectively, predict a runawayplateau loop voltage of about 0.5 V and a decaytime of about 4 s. The plateau phase loop voltagedata reported in [293] are not precise enough to
make a comparison between predicted and measured
voltage, but the reported 2 s runaway current decaytime is within a factor of 2 of the pure plasmaprediction from Eq. (18). If we take the additionaldrag eect of the bound electrons in the impure butweakly ionized low temperature plasma that is likelypresent in the after conversion phase into account,the predicted and measured runaway decay timescan be brought into agreement. It thus appearsto us that the data in [293] are consistent with
more or less ‘classical’ frictional drag decay of the
runaway current. This conclusion about frictionaldrag being the dominant slowing mechanism in wellconned runaway discharges is reinforced by recentobservations in JT-60U experiments that the steadystate measured loop voltage for the constant currentplateau phase of an after Ne pellet injection runawaydischarge (#E27507) is approximately 3 V [314].While this voltage seems initially to be too high
to agree with the prediction of Eq. (17), when the
eect of the appreciable numbers of bound electronsthat are present in this Ne dominated plasma istaken into account, the measured and predicted loopvoltages in the plateau phase are again found to bein good agreement.
For ITER parameters in a 15 MA runaway dis-
charge with an after conversion electron density of
10
20m−3, Eqns (17) and (18) predict a loop voltage
of6 V and a corresponding decay time of about
12 s. If there are appreciable impurities present, or ifthe after conversion density is articially increasedby massive gas or pellet injection, runaway decaytimes1 s seem conceivable. While these decay times
are still somewhat longer than the ITER verticalinstability growth time (see below), the possibilityof using injected gas or impurities to accelerate dis-sipation of after conversion runaway current appears
to have enough merit to warrant future study.
4.4.4. Wall interaction
If runaways in ITER are well enough conned such
that an appreciable runaway current develops, thenthe resulting runaway current channel, which is pre-
dicted to be centrally localized, will have high inter-
nal inductance and low toroidal beta and will be
vertically unstable. The resulting evolution will bea VDE in which the runaway current channel ulti-mately strikes the rst wall, typically within about0.5 s of runaway current conversion. An example ofthis type of evolution for an upward going VDE isshown below: the resulting deposition of the run-away current is poloidally localized at the top ofthe rst wall in a location that is largely prede-
termined by the vacuum equilibrium eld congu-
ration. This means that runaway strikes in ITERor a similar elongated reactor tokamak will tendto be localized and repeated. The critical issue is,then, the nature of the interaction to be expectedif 15 MA of 15 MeV electrons hits the wall. Thekinetic energy of the runaway electrons in such adischarge is not very high. For example, to supportthe 500 MJ of stored PF energy in ITER requiresonly 30 MJ of fast electrons. If these electrons are
uniformly deposited toroidally, and if there is a ver-
tical motion of 0.5 m during the period of loss, thenthe resulting surface energy loading is only about 1{2M Jm
−2. This energy level can readily be accom-
modated by the rst wall. However, these assump-tions, while plausible, are certainly arbitrary, and thepremise of good toroidal uniformity { which dependson being able to achieve millimetre tolerance rstwall surface to toroidal eld alignment { may not be
mechanically attainable in future reactor designs or
in ITER. This concern about toroidal localization isreinforced by observations in present experiments {e.g. in Tore-Supra [315] { that the runaway scrapeo length is about 1 mm and that runaway deposi-tion has been found to be very sensitive to toroidalalignment.
Self-consistent studies of ITER runaway con-
version and wall interaction using the axisymmet-ric two dimensional DINA equilibrium code illus-trate the nature and potential magnitude of therunaway deposition problem. The dynamic equi-librium evolution model used for these studiesincludes a detailed model of the ITER vacuumvessel and in-vessel component support structuresplus plasma halo currents, runaway evolution, MHD
equilibrium, and vertical and horizontal equilib-
rium motion. The plasma model is axisymmetricand does not allow for stochastic loss of runaways.It is found that for a typical 21 MA disruptionwith an initial magnetic energy of 1 GJ, and withthe further assumption that runaway currents with
2350
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 102 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
q<1 are inhibited, the estimated rst wall run-
away energy deposition is about 75 MJ and the
poloidal motion of the plasma{wall contact point
during runaway current loss is only about 0.1 m(Fig. 69). The corresponding axisymmetric deposi-tion is about 15 MJ m
−2.
t = 44 mst = 164 ms
t = 124 ms
t = 84 msBackplate
(multiple elements)
Vacuum Vessel
(multiple elements)PF Coil 
(1 of 8)
Central solenoid (PF1)First wall surface
(acting as limiter)PF2
PF3
PF8
PF4
PF5
PF6PF7
Figure 69. Plasma equilibrium evolution during an
ITER VDE with runaway conversion, as simulated with
DINA dynamic equilibrium code. The well known ten-dency for upward going VDEs to impact on a limitedportion of the upper inboard rst wall is clearly shown.In this case, the termination phase of the VDE is a 10 MArunaway current channel. Simulation data courtesy of V.Lukash and R. Khayrudinov.
If, as the present Tore-Supra observations sug-
gest, the ITER runaway radial scrape o length is2 mm, toroidal peaking owing to projected ITER
rst wall misalignment is estimated to increase localdeposition by a factor of 5, to75 MJ m
−2.T h e s e
levels would be high enough to cause surface dam-
age to the aected region and repetitive runawaystrikes would likely mandate repair or replacementof the aected surface. However, there is need tovalidate these very preliminary simulation modelresults, and to incorporate the eects of natural andenhanced stochastic loss of runaways into the cal-
culations. In addition, as noted above, massive gas
injection may provide a means to resistively dissi-
pate at least part of the runaway current as the VDEphase progresses.
If the interaction time with the wall is rapid com-
pared with the halo plasma skin time ( 0.1 s for an
assumed halo temperature of 5 eV), then the lostrunaway current is replaced with halo current. Forslower interactions, new runaways are produced asa skin current by avalanching and the total run-away energy may be an order of magnitude higher.
However, even a low negative surface electric eld
might avoid this regeneration of runaways, becausethe electric eld for a 100% runaway discharge isvery small. If, furthermore, there are secondary dis-ruptions during the current quench phase, sucientto destroy the ﬂux surfaces, this could prevent or atleast partly forestall runaway buildup. Thus, the run-away electron generation and MHD dynamics duringthe plasma{wall interaction (including VDE) need tobe investigated further. To create a self-consistent
picture, a considerable modelling eort is needed
and new experiments to validate the details of themodelling will likely also be needed. Self-consistentrunaway electron production and loss during a dis-ruption and/or VDE is a critical aspect of the inte-grated modelling development need addressed in Sec-tion 4.7.
4.4.5. Mitigation
In view of the apparent risk of large energy depo-
sition on a localized area of the rst wall in reactor
tokamaks, it will be important to develop mitiga-
tion procedures and scenarios that avoid runawayproduction and which are practical and reliable toimplement in the ITER/reactor environment. Pos-sible approaches for direct (no runaway formation)or indirect (increase of prompt losses) mitigationinclude the following.
4.4.5.1. Injection of massive quantities of hydrogen
A current quench on the time-scale of the wall
time constant ( <0:5 s) is desirable to mitigate
plasma{wall electromagnetic interactions, and this
implies that electron densities for ITER greater thanabout 10
22m−3{ about 100 times normal { are
required if runaways are to be avoided. Of course,the current quench time depends also on the plasmatemperature determined by a balance between ohmic
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2351

--- Page 103 ---

ITER Physics Basis
heating and radiation. It appears from one dimen-
sional numerical modelling (see Section 4.5 and [297,
310]) that only high density deuterium (or hydro-
gen) is able to maintain a high enough tempera-ture to allow an adequately rapid current quenchwithEE
c. As mentioned above, an increase in
density by about a factor 50 is predicted to pro-vide for a rapid enough current quench, limitingVDEs, without production of runaways. Higher- Z
materials are predicted to generate low tempera-tures, high voltages and runaways. The technical
problems and physics uncertainties about massive
hydrogen injection are considerable: multiple pel-lets, liquid jets, and massive gas pung are candi-dates that need to be studied experimentally (see[297, 311] and Section 4.5). There is also encour-aging evidence in recent JT-60U [316] and DIII-D [317] shutdown experiments that massive gaseousHe injection can eect a benign rapid plasma cur-rent shutdown in a manner that is similar to thepredicted eects of massive solid or liquid H (or
D) injection (see Section 4.5). However, there are
again uncertainties as to how this type of massive Hegas shutdown will extrapolate to larger scale reactorplasmas.
4.4.5.2. Enhancement of prompt losses
by pellet injection excited MHD
This may be an alternative to direct high den-
sity injection runaway suppression. Spontaneouslygenerated magnetic ﬂuctuations produced by pel-let injection have been demonstrated in JT-60U
[294] and TFTR [318]. Here, the injected pellet
enhanced the magnetic ﬂuctuations in the plasma(see Section 4.5). Control of the penetration ofpellets to produce enhanced deposition near inte-ger surfaces ( q=1;2) can, in principle, generate
intense magnetic ﬂuctuations. A single large pel-let can penetrate to the plasma centre ( q< 1)
but could generate mechanical damage to the rstwall if the plasma is absent. Thus, many small pel-
lets at the same time (like shotgun pellets) or a
train of multiple pellets may be better and needto be assessed. In addition, the concept of pel-let induced disruptions to break up the runawayavalanche needs to be analysed. A three dimen-sional resistive MHD simulation model coupled topellet ablation modelling with self-consistent inclu-sion of the resulting local particle transport eectswill ultimately be needed for this assessment (seeSection 4.7).4.4.5.3. External imposition of helical elds
sucient to ergodize the ﬂux surfaces
This technique has been demonstrated on JT-60U
to prevent runaways [294, 304, 305] (see also DCWdata shown in Fig. 68). However, to avoid per-turbing other before disruption attributes of theplasma, the helical elds must be pulsed on in atime that is short compared to the plasma cur-rent decay time. Such rapid pulsing is feasible inpresent experiments, but a suitable design conceptfor a fast acting coil system for a reactor sized
tokamak such as ITER has yet to be developed.
The technical problems of incorporating the requiredhigh voltage modular coil system within the nuclearshield or breeding blanket structures appear to beformidable.
4.4.5.4. External imposition of a negative voltage
This method has the possibility to shorten the
runaway current decay. This eect is observed inmany tokamaks. However the possible application toITER seems unpromising owing to engineering lim-
its on poloidal coil voltage and power: the required
one turn coil voltages exceed 1 kV. However, zero orsmall positive loop voltage can still shorten the run-away current decay appreciably, as demonstrated inJT-60U [314], and the results obtainable with a com-parable method in ITER need to be explored. Here,the minimum requirement for appreciable eect willbe to apply a plasma loop voltage that is compara-ble to the 6 V ‘resistive’ after conversion loop voltagepredicted by Eq. (17). An applied voltage of 20 V
is, in principle, possible in terms of PF coil capabil-
ities (similar voltages are developed during plasmastart-up, see Chapter 8), but would require a spe-cial ‘on demand’ power supply system to be availableafter disruption occurrence.
4.4.5.5. Mechanical intervention
As a last defence, there is the option of insert-
ing mechanical barriers (e.g. control rods or jets)or using laser blow o from a sacricial target tocreate a high density protective plasma in front of
the runaway impacted region of the rst wall. These
types of mechanical interventions may be possiblebecause the induced toroidal eddy currents will keepthe runaway discharge o the wall for approximately0.5 s, which is conceptually long enough for mechan-ical devices to be inserted. A laser blow o system
2352
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 104 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
could be much faster, but it is not clear whether
the energetics of producing enough blow o plasma
are workable and whether the plasma can be sus-
tained long enough to fully dissipate the runawaycurrent.
4.4.6. Conclusions and recommendations
for future research
The high currents and strong avalanche growth
predicted in reactor scale tokamaks make localizedenergy deposition by runaway electrons a potentiallyserious problem for all such devices and for ITER.The concerns apply to the generation of runawaysby disruptions, loss of control VDEs, and fast plasma
current shutdown. In all of these cases, the theory of
axisymmetric (good ﬂux surface) evolution of run-aways seems to be well understood, and the local-ized wall loading consequences of axisymmetric dis-ruptions/VDEs with runaway conversion appear tobe unacceptably large. However, there are a num-ber of possible mitigating factors that need to beassessed. Anomalous loss of runaways are observedin present experiments and need to be explained,especially in regard to the eect of MHD ﬂuctu-
ations in enhancing losses in the runaway forma-
tion phase. Here, three dimensional MHD simula-tions are needed to understand the eect of mag-netic perturbations on the runaway electron gener-ation in present experiments and to make predic-tions for ITER. Beyond taking the eects of inherentMHD ﬂuctuations into account, a number of possi-ble runaway prevention and mitigation schemes areidentied, but they all require further theoretical
and experimental development before their ecacy
in a reactor situation can be ascertained. Issues thatrelate to runaway avoidance and/or mitigation dur-ing/by fast plasma shutdown are further addressedin Section 4.5.
4.5. Fast plasma power, energy
and current shutdown
A means for eecting fast fusion power and ther-
mal energy shutdown on a time-scale of a few sec-onds is foreseen as being needed for tokamak reac-tors in general and for ITER in particular. The rea-
s o n sf o rh a v i n gaf a s tp l a s m ap o w e ra n de n e r g y
shutdown capability in ITER are many and includethe ‘machine protection’ need to thermally protectactively cooled divertor surfaces if a loss of coolantﬂow or loss of coolant event occurs, the need tobe able to radiatively dissipate the plasma thermalenergy before a rst wall contact event occurs and
the possibility that safety related licensing require-
ments may call for the availability of one or more
fast plasma power shutdown systems. For ITER,thermal protection of the divertor surfaces requiresthat the fusion burn be terminated within about 3 s.Power shutdown on a similar time-scale would also beseen to be adequate for foreseeable licensing require-ments. A somewhat faster thermal energy shutdown,in1 s, is needed for unequivocal wall contact dam-
age avoidance.
4.5.1. Requirements and means for fast shutdown
The time-scales for a normal well controlled
plasma power and current termination in ITER are,respectively, projected to be about 100 s and 200 s[8]. The termination time-scales for normal shutdownare set both by the physics considerations involved{ energy and particle connement times for powertermination, current prole equilibration times for
current termination { and by practical design consid-
erations: particle exhaust capability (pumping capa-bility); PF power and voltage limits; time constantsof the vacuum vessel and in-vessel component sup-port structures; and so forth. These ‘practical’ mat-ters are discussed in Chapter 8. These physics andpractical considerations collectively make obtaininga fast shutdown by normal control means withoutdisruption unlikely, so schemes for ITER shutdownhave focused on the use of impurity injection to rst
rapidly terminate fusion reactivity (easily obtained
by the immediate adiabatic cooling that injectedimpurities provide), and then (ideally) to subse-quently radiate the plasma thermal and magneticenergies in a more or less uniform and benign man-ner to the rst wall (see, for example, [319]). Reac-tivity termination in ITER is sucient to achievethe divertor target thermal protection goal; radia-tive energy dissipation is desirable to minimize diver-
tor target erosion and is necessary to avoid wall
contact damage. A variety of impurity injectionschemes (details below) are theoretically capable ofachieving these primary fast shutdown objectives inITER [297].
In addition, the parameters of the fast current ter-
mination in ITER should also ideally be such that
the magnitude and toroidal asymmetries of the in-vessel halo currents produced during the VDE phaseof the current decay are minimized (see Section 4.3),and also such that appreciable runaway electron con-version (see Section 4.4) is avoided. These objectives
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2353

--- Page 105 ---

ITER Physics Basis
for fast current shutdown, which are secondary to
the more essential power and thermal energy shut-
down objectives, pose a contradictory set of shut-
down considerations, and there are presently sub-stantial physics uncertainties in being able to denefast shutdown concepts that unequivocally satisfy allprimary and secondary fast shutdown objectives forreactor scale plasmas [278].
The options proposed for ITER fast shutdown are
(1) impurity pellet injection; and (2) other very low-
Zinjection methods (massive deuterium pellet injec-
tion, intense D or He gas pung, and injection of aliquid hydrogen jet). Present understanding of thephysics basis for these options and of related con-siderations that aect their implementation in ITERare presented below. Conclusions about the overallextrapolation of present understanding to ITER fol-low in Section 4.5.5.
4.5.2. Impurity pellet injection
The injection of a solid impurity pellet (com-
monly termed a ‘killer pellet’), typically comprisedof moderate- Zor high-Zmaterial, into a tokamak
plasma is capable { provided that the pellet size andvelocity are chosen such that the pellet can pene-trate deeply into the plasma core { of eecting a non-disruptive fast plasma energy and current shutdown.Impurity pellet shutdown experiments demonstrat-
ing non-disruptive dissipation of the plasma ther-
mal and/or magnetic energies have been performedin JT-60U [130, 294], ASDEX-Upgrade [320], DIII-D [321], Alcator C-MOD [322], JET [323] and TFTR[324]. Figure 70 shows an example of fast shutdownof a neutral beam heated plasma in JT-60U. In thisexample, obtained with injection of a solid neon pel-let (3m md i a m e t e r , 510
20Ne atoms, injection
velocity 0.8 km s−1), the adiabatic and radiative
cooling that follows injection is very eective: the
central plasma temperature drops in 0.5 ms, and
the 1.6 MA plasma current subsequently decays in20 ms. Energy deposition on the divertor targets is
low relative to disruption thermal quench levels andis correlated with the current quench: the intensethermal energy pulse associated with a disruptionthermal quench is absent. There is also evidence fromhard X-ray data that the current shutdown producesan appreciable number of runaway electrons.
The relatively benign discharge termination by
impurity pellet injection shown in Fig. 70 is typical ofthe other experimental results cited above and dierssignicantly from a density limit disruption producedPlasma current  (MA)2
30
050
30
20
10
0-50
2
011
Hard X ray (arb. units)Inner divertor Outer divertor Te(0) (keV)
Time (s)8.30 8.35
Ne pelletD-D neutrons (4 x1015 s-1) Divertor target power (MW/m2)Loop voltage (V)Beam power (12 MW)
Figure 70. Fast plasma shutdown in a beam heated
JT-60U plasma (Ref. [130]). Ne pellet injection producesrapid radiation of the plasma thermal energy and a non-disruptive current quench. The hard X-ray emission indi-cates that runaway electrons are produced during the
current quench (see Section 4.4).
by gas pung. When a discharge is terminated by a
deeply penetrating impurity pellet, thermal energydeposition on the divertor is reduced or absent andthe thermal energy is instead radiated more or lessuniformly to the rst wall. The usual positive plasmacurrent and negative loop voltage spikes typicallyseen after disruption are also small or absent. Thesecharacteristics are observed in cases in which suf-cient pellet penetration to cool the plasma centre
is obtained: shallow penetration that fails to reduce
the central electron temperature generates instead adisruptive thermal energy quench energy and a pos-itive plasma current spike, exactly as observed for anormal density limit disruption or for gas injectioninitiated plasma shutdown.
2354
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 106 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
4.5.2.1. Pellet penetration and species
The ecacy of killer pellet shutdown clearly
depends on having sucient penetration of the pel-let into the plasma such that the resulting impuri-ties are deposited more or less uniformly through-out the plasma cross-section. Eective shutdownalso depends on selecting an impurity that radiatesstrongly at the moderate plasma temperatures (typ-ically a few hundred eV) that arise following theinitial adiabatic cooling that injection produces. In
present experiments, these features are obtained by
tailoring the pellet species and mass (see, for exam-ple, [320]) and, to a more limited extent, injectionvelocity. Plasma and pellet injection parameters forthe various injection experiments are summarized inTable 7. Data from a unique massive D
2pellet injec-
tion experiment in Alcator C-Mod are also included,as are data from two ITER pellet shutdown simu-lations. The interpretation that can be drawn from
Table 7 is that medium- Zor high-Zimpurity pel-
let injection with injection velocity 1k ms
−1can
eect non-disruptive thermal and current shutdownin present tokamaks, albeit often with at least somerunaway generation.
Extrapolation of the penetration characteristics
of impurity pellets to reactor regime plasmas with
higher temperatures and densities shows that the
method is viable for ITER, albeit with a need forhigher pellet velocities and larger pellet sizes. Cal-culations of the ablation of solid noble gas pelletsin a burn phase ITER plasma show that a solidkrypton pellet with 10 mm diameter and 3.7 km s
−1
velocity (as can be marginally achieved with a two
stage gas gun launcher, see [325]) can penetrateto about two thirds of the ITER plasma minorradius (Fig. 71) [319]. This penetration, which is
well inside the sawtooth radius, is likely sucient
for a non-disruptive shutdown, although the mod-elling subsequently developed in [297] suggests thatwith this type of Kr (or other high- Zspecies) injec-
tion, major runaway electron conversion will occurin the subsequent current quench (see discussion ofrunaway avoidance below). If the lack of full pen-etration in ITER proves to be a problem (veloc-ities for full penetration are probably beyond gas
gun limits), sequentially injected lower velocity pel-
lets would allow impurities to be delivered to theplasma axis. Here the cooling produced by the rstpellet allows deeper penetration by a following pel-let. The use of two sequential pellets to obtain deeperpenetration has been successfully demonstrated inexperiments in TFTR [324]. Extension of the tech-
nique to multiple sequential pellets, perhaps with
species/size/velocity tailored to achieve optimal dis-
tribution of impurities throughout the plasma cross-section is, in principle, straightforward, but has notyet been attempted.
Ablation rate (1025 atoms/s)
1.0 2.0 3.0 0024
Minor radius (m)rpellet = 5 mm, vpellet = 5 km/s
5 mm, 3.7 km/s
2.5 mm, 3.7 km/s4 mm, 3.7 km/sÆTæ = 18 keV, Ænæ = 1.2  x 1020
Figure 71. Calculated penetration of solid krypton pel-
lets into a high temperature (ignited burn) ITER plasma(a=3:0 m, reproduced from Ref. [319]).
4.5.3. Eects of impurity pellet injection
In addition to the basic adiabatic cooling, ther-
mal energy radiation and current shutdown eectsaddressed above, a number of additional physics con-siderations are relevant to application of impurity
pellet injection for fast plasma shutdown. The prin-
cipal considerations discussed below are
(1) distribution of the deposited impurities;
(2) radiative mitigation of divertor thermal quench
heat loads;
(3) vertical stability of the plasma during the cur-
rent shutdown;
(4) reduction of halo currents and halo current
asymmetries;
(5) runaway electron generation; and
(6) eect of fast shutdown on energetic ( )p a r t i c l e
losses.
4.5.3.1. Distribution of impurities
Adequate distribution of injected impurities with-
in the plasma cross-section is needed for success-ful fast shutdown. Here, comparisons of the pre-dicted versus measured pellet penetration in present
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2355

--- Page 107 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Table 7. Plasma and pellet injection parameters for present fast shutdown experiments and for simulations of ITER
fast shutdown
na
eTe(0) Sizeb/mass Atoms vpellettqcq HXR or
Tokamak (1020m−3) (keV) Pellet (mm/mg) (1020)( k m s−1) (ms) (ms) runaways
Alcator 1{2 1.5 Ag + poly- 2.5 mg (Ag) 0.14 10.5 2 HXR burst
C-Mod ethylene (Ag) at injection
Alcator 2 1.5 D 20 pellets 30 0.8 0.5 5 (same No indication
C-Mod total as dis-
ruption)
ASDEX- Ne 1 :71:71:8 1.7 0.56 1 6 No indication
Upgrade
DIII-D 5( ? ) 2 A ro rN e 1 :81.8 30 . 5 0.1 3{5 HXR burst at
or 2:82.8 (Ne) injection; also
duringIpdecay
JET 3.9 3.8 Poly- 6 3; 70 mg 40 (C), 1.2 1{2 20 HXR, etc.,
(central) propylene 7 (H) at VDE max
JT-60U 0.06{0.08 2N e 4  4(0:2{0.7)c2{7 0.6{0.95 | HXR at
Iptermination
TFTR 0.4{0.5 4{5 D + 0.01{ 3 :83.8 (?), 2 1.2 5 none, No evidence
0.1% Kr sequential pellets, 400 or
2 ms separation 20{30d
ITER 1.1 18, Kr 10 80 3.7 8080 No runaways:
hTi=1 1 D r e i c e rs o u r c e
insucient
ITER 1.0 hTi=1 1 X e 7:5 20 NA 40300 12 MA
aLine average or volume average (indicated by hi) unless otherwise noted.
bDiameter (sphere) or diameter length (cylinder) or H WD; ? denotes uncertainty.
c20{70% of nominal pellet mass is estimated to be delivered to plasma.
dCurrent quench eect varies depending on Kr content (% Kr)
experiments show that penetration is reasonably well
described by standard pellet ablation models that are
suitably adjusted from the applicable pellet species
(see [325, 326]). However, the resulting in-plasmadistribution of ablated impurities and the electrondensity that arises from the ablation are not ade-quately described by a simple model in which theablated and then ionized impurities stay localizedon the ﬂux surfaces near where they were born.Instead, the resulting distribution of impurities isbetter described by a ‘back averaging’ mixing model,in which the particles produced at a given point in
the pellet ablation are spread more or less uniformly
over the ﬂux surfaces outboard of the ablation loca-tion [327]. The degree of back averaging required tomatch the results of TFTR fast shutdown exper-iments is 100% (added impurities uniformly dis-
tributed along the pellet penetration chord). Incor-poration of back averaging in simulations of the DIII-D Ne pellet injection also seems to be needed to
explain the details of radiative shutdown observed
in these experiments. The net eect of back aver-
aging is to reduce the eective penetration of thepellet relative to ablation model predictions of thetype shown in Fig. 71. This penetration reductioneect is not particularly serious in present exper-iments, where deep penetration is readily achiev-able, but may be more serious for an ITER classplasma.
A similar rapid outward transport of injected par-
ticles is seen in hydrogen pellet injection experimentsintended for plasma fuelling: net fuelling eciency is
much lower than a static pellet ablation model would
predict. This is for pellets injected from the low mag-netic eld side of the plasma column; much higherinjection eciencies (near unity) are seen with oth-erwise similar injection from the high magnetic eldside of the plasma column [258]. The dierence in
2356
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 108 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
eciency and the origin of the back averaging eect
in present LFS impurity injection is ascribed in [258]
to the eect of toroidal curvature in expelling the
diamagnetic ablation cloud. The diamagnetic eectwould aid (or at least not degrade) impurity pen-etration for HFS injection, but it is not clear thatthe curved pellet guide tube techniques used forHFS hydrogen pellet fuelling can be extended tothe larger/heavier impurity pellets required for ITERshutdown. If HFS impurity pellet injection is not pos-sible for ITER, injection will have to be from the
low eld side, and the eects of outward diamagnetic
drift of the injected impurities will have to be takeninto account in choosing the pellet parameters.
4.5.3.2. Radiation of thermal energy and divertor
energy deposition mitigation
With a suitable choice of pellet injection param-
eters, there is no thermal quench in the classicsense and ecient radiation of the plasma thermalenergy (which is conserved in the initial adiabaticfast cooling phase) is possible. The heat load onthe divertor targets has been drastically reducedby neon pellet injection in JT-60U [130, 294] (seeFig. 70). Neon injection into an ASDEX-Upgradeohmic plasma [321] results in a similar reduction
of thermal energy deposition on the divertor and
a10 times increase in power radiated from the
plasma (300 MW peak, or 20 MW m
−3if the radi-
ation power is volumetrically uniform). These radi-ation levels are consistent with radiative dissipationof the total thermal and magnetic energy (0.6 MJ)during the 5 ms current decay. In DIII-D experi-ments, analysis of the radiative cooling eect of a1.8 mm diameter Ne pellet (2 10
20atoms) injected
with moderate velocity (390 m s−1) show that the
measured radiation is consistent with the expected
multi-step impurity ionization process, and also withthe observation that the divertor energy deposi-tion was reduced by about 50% rather than 100%[328]. In the JET pellet experiments, divertor targetenergy deposition (which may include some magneticenergy) was 20% of the 2.6 MJ thermal energy,
and multi-chord bolometer data showed more orless uniform radiation from the full plasma cross-
section with a peak intensity of 7 MW m
−3[323].
The estimated total radiation is, with an assump-tion of toroidal symmetry, consistent with the dis-sipation of 2.6 MJ thermal energy in 10 ms, and
with dissipation of 13 MJ of combined thermal andmagnetic energy in the 35 ms current decay. Theoverall self-consistency of the plasma energy bal-
ance in present experiments and the premise that
100% radiative dissipation can be obtained in a
reactor plasma shutdown therefore seem to be wellfounded.
Too rapid radiation of either the ITER plasma
thermal energy or the plasma magnetic energy (both
1 GJ) can lead to rst wall surface melting, and,
hence, is undesirable. This concern is noted in [319].Elementary analysis shows that for present ITERparameters and moderate radiation peaking factors(2), the quench duration threshold for melting of a
beryllium rst wall surface will be 10 ms. As sim-
ulation data for ITER shutdown show (see Fig. 75below), most candidate scenarios stay comfortablyclear of this 10 ms wall melting onset threshold.
4.5.3.3. Vertical instability, halo currents and halo
current mitigation
For elongated plasmas, the rapid plasma pres-
sure (
p) loss and current decay that pellet injection
shutdown produces can initiate vertical instability ofthe plasma column (a vertical instability event orV D E ,s e eS e c t i o n4 . 3 ) ,a n df a s ts h u t d o w ni nA l c a -tor C-Mod, ASDEX-Upgrade, DIII-D and JET typi-cally produces vertical instability with the generationof plasma and in-vessel halo currents that in turnproduce substantial vertical forces on the respec-
tive in-vessel or vessel structures. In this regard,
the eects of fast shutdown are qualitatively sim-ilar to the eects of a disruption. However, com-parison of the measured halo currents and the mea-sured or inferred vertical forces for pellet shutdownVDEs versus comparable disruption initiated VDEsin ASDEX-Upgrade show that pellet shutdown canproduce reduced halo current magnitude and verti-cal force [320] (see Section 4.3). Figure 72 shows the
substantial halo current magnitude and force reduc-
tion obtained in ASDEX-Upgrade by pellet shut-down compared to disruption. A 4-times estimatedpeak force reduction is typical and the reduction intotal vertical impulse
Z
F
Zdt
is even greater owing to the faster overall current
decay.
Similar halo current reduction benets of pel-
let shutdown are seen in DIII-D experiments inwhich the halo current characteristics of loss of con-trol VDEs (initiated by disabling the vertical posi-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2357

--- Page 109 ---

ITER Physics Basis
0
-0.5
Vertical position (m)Plasma current (MA)
#5697(disruption)
Vertical position (m)0
-0.5100
020010
020
10
0200.5
0#5698 
(Ne pellet)Pellet
monitorPlasma current (MA)
100
0200Ihalo BT (halo force, kN) Ihalo BT (halo force, kN)
Time (s)1.72 1.73 1.74
Time (s)1.72 1.73 1.74Power to divertor (MW) Power to divertor (MW)0.5
0
Figure 72. Disruption and pellet injection fast shut-
down in ASDEX-Upgrade. Fast shutdown (Ne pellet)results in reduced vessel vertical force (inferred fromthe measured halo current) and absence of signicant
thermal quench loading on the divertor. Note also the
absence of a positive plasma current spike and reductionof the divertor target heating associated with the currentquench.
tion control) are compared with and without pel-
let injection (Fig. 73). Pellet injected VDEs havesubstantially reduced halo current magnitude andtoroidal peaking factor (peak/average current den-
sity, see Section 4.3) [321]. Halo current magni-
tude reductions in Alcator C-Mod pellet experimentsare similar, and are typically about 50% [322]. Thereduction in halo current magnitude in the variousexperiments cited is consistent with the predicteddependence of halo current fraction on halo tem-perature (lower temperature results in lower peakhalo current, or, alternately, the acceleration of theplasma current decay relative to the vertical instabil-
ity growth time). The cause for the reduced toroidal
asymmetry is not as obvious, but may also be due tolower plasma and halo temperature.
4.5.3.4. Avoidance of vertical instability and halo
currents
The onset of vertical instability following fast
shutdown in a vertically elongated plasma can beavoided if the initial plasma position is chosen tobe close to the so called passive stability ‘neutralVDE (no pellet)
Ne pellet
Ar pellet
Halo Current/Plasma Current0.2 0.3 0.00.0
0.12.03.04.0
At Ih maximum:Toroidal Peaking Factor (peak/average)VDE (no pellet)
Ne pelletStart
StartBound of all discharge trajectories
End
Figure 73. Halo current data for DIII-D VDEs (vertical
control disabled) and pellet shutdown (also with controldisabled). Datum points show peak normalized halo cur-rent magnitude and TPF (see Section 4.3) at the time ofmaximum halo current; typical trajectories (versus timeduring the current decay) of I
h=Ip0and TPF for VDE
and Ne pellet VDE are also shown. Pellet injected VDEs
have lower halo current magnitude and toroidal asymme-
try.
point’, where the initial vertical displacement of the
plasma magnetic axis or current centroid that occurs
after disruption or fast shutdown ploss is small
or zero [281]. If the ensuing current quench is rapidenough with respect to the vertical instability growthtime, then the resulting plasma motion is predomi-nantly radially inward (Fig. 74), and a major ver-tical excursion and the associated halo currents inthe upper or lower in-vessel and vessel structures areabsent. This type of passive neutral point instability
avoidance is observed for fast current quenches in JT-
60U [281] and Alcator C-Mod [279], and comparisonof VDEs in DIII-D with faster versus slower quenchrates show that faster VDEs have lower halo currentsand correspondingly lower vessel forces [322].
In JT-60U, it has been possible to extend the neu-
tral point VDE/halo current avoidance technique toslower current quenches with active control of theplasma position [329]. Such control is made possibleby a plasma axis vertical position magnetic diagnos-tic signal that includes compensation for the eect
of the toroidal vacuum vessel eddy currents that
develop during the current quench [330]. The result-ing actively stabilized single null divertor plasmascan be controlled vertically down to low plasma cur-rent (10%I
p0), and halo currents in the divertor
region are avoided [331].
2358 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 110 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Up (45˚ -135˚ )
In (135˚ -225˚ )
Down (225˚ -315˚ )Initial Direction (axis):Initial Vertical Position of Axis (cm)02030
10
-10
-20
Current Quench Time (ms)5 10 100 200 50
Figure 74. Direction of plasma axis motion in after
disruption VDEs in JT-60U versus initial vertical posi-tion of the magnetic axis and current quench time (fromRef. [323]). The angles referred to in the Figure legendgive the direction of the initial axis motion: 0
= radially
outward, 90= vertically upwards, etc. Plasmas with ini-
tial position 10 cm above the midplane exhibit passive
neutral stability for quench times in the 5{25 ms range.Compare with Fig. 75.
The location of the JT-60U neutral point 15 cm
above the device midplane, the sensitivity of the neu-
tral point height to current quench rate apparent inFig. 74, and the key observation noted in [281] thatthe growth rate for vertical instability depends oncurrent quench rate, can all be explained in termsof the destabilizing eect that up{down asymmetryin the toroidal eddy currents induced in the JT-60Uvacuum vessel has on the vertical position instability[332]. Here, modelling of the initial plasma equilib-rium modication that changes in 
pand/or current
prole produce, and of the separate vertically desta-
bilizing eect that asymmetric induced vessel cur-rents produce, shows that the passive neutral pointfor JT-60U disruptions should be 10 cm above the
device midplane (Fig. 75). This estimate is in rea-sonable agreement with the passive neutral stabilitydata shown in Fig. 74. However, the fact that thereare two separate mechanisms responsible for the ini-tial vertical motion makes the precise position of the
neutral point dependent on both the magnitude of
the prole changes that arise during the disruptionor fast shutdown thermal quench and on internalinductance change and rate of current quench thatfollow in the current decay phase. This means thatthe neutral point in a single null tokamak with anup{down asymmetric vacuum vessel and/or an asym-
metric initial plasma position will be somewhat sensi-
tive to both the disruption and fast shutdown prole
parameter variations (especially to variation in l
i)
and to initial dIp=dt. Such sensitivities are, in fact,
observed in JT-60U plasma equilibrium control tran-sients (response to ELMs, sawteeth, etc.) [333], andsimilar neutral point sensitivities can be expected inITER.
Zo (cm)-40-8-6-4-2-02
0 -20 -20DZ(cm) after 1 ms I = 700 kA; n = R/B Z ( BZ/ R) = -2.0
Figure 75. Calculation with a TSC model of the initial
displacement of the JT-60U plasma magnetic axis 1 ms
after a simulated thermal quench (see Ref. [332]). The
initial position Z0of the plasma magnetic axis before
the quench is varied relative to the machine midplane(Z= 0). The eld index parameter nchosen for the
modelling results in a plasma with an initial elongationof about 1.6. The neutral point is about 10 cm above themidplane (cf. data in Fig. 74).
Studies of the neutral point location and sensitiv-
ities for an ITER like model tokamak show that the
neutral point for JT-60U like prole variation param-
eters (p!0,li0) lies about 20 cm below the as
designed position of the plasma magnetic axis [334].This suggests that the ITER plasma will exhibit closeto neutral initial vertical stability characteristics fordisruptions or fast shutdowns in which the change ininternal inductance is small or positive. For theseconditions, representative of pellet injection shut-down, a relatively slow upward initial motion of the
plasma will occur and it may be possible to maintain
active control of the current decay, especially if thedecay rate is not too high. However, detailed studyof the PF system feasibility of maintaining verticalcontrol in ITER after fast shutdown or disruptionremains to be performed.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2359

--- Page 111 ---

ITER Physics Basis
4.5.3.5. Runaway electron generation
P e l l e ti n j e c t i o ns h u t d o w ni np r e s e n te x p e r i m e n t s
has a clear tendency to produce runaway elec-trons. In some cases, substantial runaway conver-sion is obtained. In JT-60U, when the n=1
andn= 2 mode ﬂuctuation levels were small at
the time of impurity pellet injection, decrease of
the central electron temperature is always followed
by a full current runaway discharge [278]. How-ever, in cases where intense magnetic ﬂuctuationsare present, this fast generation of runaway elec-trons is avoided, although runaway generation isobserved in the later phase of current quench whenthe level of magnetic ﬂuctuations becomes low. Theﬂuctuation amplitude threshold for avoiding run-away electron generation increases with higher cur-
rent quench rate [305] (see Section 4.5, Fig. 73
and related text). Avoidance of runaway genera-tion has been demonstrated in JT-60U for low B
tor
(<2.2 T) [278], and for enhanced magnetic pertur-
bations generated spontaneously or by an externalhelical magnetic eld at B
tor>2:2 T [304]. Fur-
ther discussion of the eects of magnetic ﬂuctuationson runaway production, and on how these eectsmay extrapolate to reactor plasmas, can be foundin Section 4.5.
Transient runaway production indicated by an
HXR or non-thermal ECE burst is seen in pelletshutdown experiments in other tokamaks. Burstscorrelated with pellet ablation are seen in DIII-Dand can be explained by an ‘electron interchange’mechanism identied in [328], in which localizedMHD instabilities driven by the large pressure gra-dients produced by pellet injection lead to an inter-change of hot electrons from the plasma interiorwith cold electrons in the high E-eld region behind
the pellet. Subsequent acceleration of the hot elec-
trons produces runaways and the observed HXRburst.
Runaway generation in present shutdown exper-
iments appears to be qualitatively consistent, withthe addition of the interchange mechanism noteabove, with the usual Dreicer source productionmechanism. However, in future higher current reac-tor plasmas such as ITER, the knock-on avalanche
mechanism (see Section 4.4) is expected to dominate
runaway production, and this dierence in mech-anism leads to preference for shutdown scenariosbased upon massive deuterium injection. This aspectof the pellet shutdown runaway avoidance issue isdiscussed below.4.5.3.6. Loss of high energy alpha particles
For fast shutdown in reactor plasmas, the fast
drop of plasma temperature and increase in densitywill reduce the slowing down time of alpha particlesto1 ms, so that the pre-shutdown alpha particles
will be thermalized very rapidly relative to the cur-rent quench. However, the magnetic ﬂuctuations thatimpurity injection produces, and which are of bene-
t for mitigating runaway electron generation, may
enhance the loss of alpha particles. Thus the opti-mum level of magnetic ﬂuctuation is not clear andboth the runaway and alpha loss eects of injectionneed to be considered.
There is experimental evidence for MHD ﬂuctua-
tion enhancement of fast alpha loss. In TFTR, alpha
particle loss before and during high- disruptions
was detected with escaping fast ion detectors [335].Detectable alpha losses started during the disruptionprecursor phase, which was dominated by the explo-sive growth of a ballooning mode, and a large burstof escaping alpha particles occurred at the thermalquench. Approximately 20% of the stored alpha par-ticles were released during the disruption, and theremaining alpha particles were either thermalized or
lost in places not predicted by models for the alpha
losses in the steady state (pre-disruption) phase.Alpha losses owing to other types of MHD activity,including sawteeth and locked modes (see Section 2.2and Section 2.5), were also seen. Further considera-tion of the TFTR results and study of comparablesituations for disruptions and/or fast shutdown infuture DT experiments (e.g. JET) is needed.
4.5.4. Other fast shutdown methods
The exponential multiplication of minute levels
of initial runaway electrons following disruption or
fast shutdown in high current reactor tokamaks
by the ‘knock-on’ avalanche process is theoreti-cally expected to be the dominant mechanism forrunaway electron current conversion in such toka-maks [297,311,319] (see also Section 4.4). Accordingto the theory of the knock-on avalanche process,shutdown schemes based upon very low- Zinjection,
which produce high after-injection density, arefavoured to avoid or reduce runaway electron gen-
eration. Figure 76 shows data from simulations for
ITER of the thermal and current quench durationand runaway conversion characteristics (predicatedon an assumption of no MHD ﬂuctuation losses)for candidate injected impurities [297]. Figure 76demonstrates that only injection of massive quanti-
2360
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 112 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
ties (50 g) of deuterium (or hydrogen) produces a
current quench that is rapid enough to appreciably
mitigate halo currents while simultaneously avoiding
signicant runaway conversion. High- Z(Xe) or even
nominal low- Z(Be) injection produces substantial
runaway conversion.
The quantity of injected deuterium required for
unconditional runaway avoidance in ITER is large
(1025atoms or a 0.1 m diameter pellet) relative to
normal refuelling pellet injection practice, and theresulting after-injection plasma density of 10
22m−3
is more than a factor of ten higher than the high-
est densities obtained in present tokamaks and morethan 100 times the Greenwald ‘density limit’ forITER (see Section 3.3). There are, therefore, majorphysics questions associated with the feasibility ofhigh density shutdown, including how such mas-
sive quantities of deuterium can be delivered to the
plasma and whether the resulting plasma densitiescan be sustained for long enough to eect a disrup-tion free shutdown. The candidate options for run-away free shutdown appear to be limited to D
2or He
injection (H injection is undesirable owing to the sub-sequent contamination of DT plasmas that in-vesselretained H would produce), with injection eected ingaseous, solid (D
2) or liquid (D 2or He) form. These
options are examined below. As the discussion shows,
physics understanding of the high density shutdown
regime is incomplete and experimental studies areextremely preliminary and so future R&D is needed.
4.5.4.1. Intense gas pu
The quantities of D or He needed to eect a
fast plasma shutdown in ITER can be delivered tothe torus by high pressure gas injection. What theplasma response to such massive injection will be
i s ,h o w e v e r ,a no p e nq u e s t i o n ,a n de x t r a p o l a t i o no f
present experience suggests that gas injection willproduce a disruption rather than a radiative shut-down. In JT-60U, intense helium gas injection hasbeen used to generate a fast current quench [316].This injection typically produces several minor dis-ruptions during the resulting current quench and thecurrent quench rate is observed to increase at eachminor disruption. Runaway electrons are not pro-
duced. However, with the maximum injection rates
available (90 Pa m
3s−1a t2a t m )i tw a sn o tp o s s i b l e
to greatly enhance the average current quench rateeven for the relatively favourable conditions of lowﬂat-top plasma current and toroidal magnetic eld(400 kA, 1.5 T) chosen for the experiments.T h el i m i t a t i o no nq u e n c hr a t eo b s e r v e di nt h eJ T -
60U can be ascribed to the shrinkage of the plasma
current channel that occurs just before each minor
disruption. This shrinkage raises the joule heatingpower density, so the reduction in central electrontemperature need for a more rapid current quench isnot obtained. Furthermore, the minor disruption alsoexpels particles in the central region and so tends tocounteract the desired eect of gas injection. Similarlimitations are expected for reactor/ITER shutdown,s ot h et e c h n i q u em a yb em o r es u i t a b l ef o rs h u t d o w n
scenarios (e.g. safety), where concerns about relia-
bility of action outweigh concerns about producing adisruption.
4.5.4.2. Liquid jet injection
Injection of a high velocity ( 600 ms
−1)j e to f
liquid deuterium with a diameter of 1 cm has been
proposed as a means of delivering the massive density
increase needed to avoid runaway electron generationin an ITER class tokamak [336]. The method bearsa considerable similarity to injection of a closelyspaced train of solid pellets (see following discus-sion), and, in fact, calculations of the plasma pen-etration and ablation of a jet into an ITER plasmashow that breakup of the continuous jet into a trainof droplets owing to an ablation pressure instabilityis likely [336]. Theoretical analyses of other hydrody-
namic and thermodynamic stability considerations
that apply to jet penetration into a plasma and to thepreceding vacuum propagation phase, where ‘vac-uum ﬂashing’ (jet surface boiling) is a potential issue,suggest that the method can be successfully applied(subject to questions about the plasma response tothe deposited deuterons) for shutdown of an ITERclass tokamak [336]. Testing these theoretical predic-tions in present experiments and with more sophisti-
cated simulations is needed. More modest jet veloc-
ities (100{300 m s
−1) and diameters ( 1 mm) are
sucient for present tokamaks.
4.5.4.3. Solid deuterium pellet injection
The density increase necessary to provide a run-
away free shutdown in ITER can, in principle, be
obtained by injection of a single 10 cm diameter
deuterium pellet with an initial velocity of 1 km s−1.
However, the technological problems of making andaccelerating a pellet of this size, and the virtual cer-tainty that a large pellet will fragment upon ini-tial penetration into the plasma, make sequential
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2361

--- Page 113 ---

ITER Physics Basis
1 10 100 10000.0010.0100.1001.00010.00
Be
DInjected 
mass (g)
Thermal 
quenchduration3.0
12
40
10025
705.0
8.8
18
30
5 MA (RA)
2 MA (RA)
ne (after injection) / n e0Thermal  or current quench duration (s)Limit
VDE
Xe0.02
0.05
0.46
2.2
Current 
quenchduration15 MA 
(RA)
No FW surface melt 
 (W = 1 GJ , PF = 2;  Be FW, T
o = 600 K)I = 21 MA, ne0 @ 1.2 x 1020 m-3
No RA 0.5 MA (RA)
tcq   20/ne,20
Figure 76. Thermal and current quench durations for fast plasma shutdown in ITER
with various quantities (masses in g) and species (xenon, beryllium and deuterium) ofinjected impurity. From simulation data in Ref. [297], presented to show the eect ofafter-injection density increase. The relative magnitude of the resulting runaway (RA)conversion is shown by the width of the shaded umbra that surrounds the lines joiningthe datum points for each species. The predicted density enhancement threshold forunconditional runaway avoidance (‘no RA’, see Section 4.4), the limit on maximumcurrent quench duration set by VDE/halo current mitigation (see Section 4.4), and
the limit on minimum thermal quench time set by rst wall surface melting (see text
above), are indicated.
injection of multiple smaller pellets a more cred-
ible alternative, and the injection of a sequentialtrain of relatively small ( 1c m
3) solid deuterium
pellets has been proposed as a possible means forITER deuterium pellet shutdown [297]. The use oftwo sequential pellets to facilitate deeper penetrationhas been demonstrated in TFTR with Kr-doped D
2
pellets, and the anticipated benet of deeper pene-
tration of the second pellet has been veried [324].
The central plasma density increases (mainly fromthe deuterons) obtained in these experiments weresubstantial: about ve-fold on an initial basis of510
19m−3.
An exploratory experiment to study the eects
of massive deuterium injection with a multiple pelletinjector has been carried out on Alcator C-Mod [337].
Up to 20 pellets (3 1021deuterons) were injected
within 1.5 ms. The injection geometry and velocitydispersion among the pellets resulted in a pellet ‘bar-rage’ rather than a well organized sequential train.Approximately half of the pellets were seen to ablatewithin the plasma. The after-injection density andtemperature were, respectively, about 1 :610
21m−3
(10 times the initial density) and 200 eV (con-
sistent with adiabatic cooling of the initial 2 keVplasma). The after-injection density corresponded toapproximately half of the injected deuterons beingretained. Injection produced a disruption with athermal quench followed by a positive current spike.However, the resulting current quench was not any
2362
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 114 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
faster than a naturally occurring disruption, and
halo currents were also not reduced. These current
quench and halo current behaviours are consistent
with earlier high- Zpellet experiments on C-Mod,
which showed that Tehad to be reduced to 20 eV
or less in order to accelerate the current quench andreduce halo current [323]. Future experiments witha better injection technique and/or the addition ofhigher-Zimpurities to facilitate more rapid plasma
cooling are indicated.
Theoretical modelling of the radiation opacity and
resistive MHD stability characteristics of very high
density hydrogen and other low- Zp l a s m a si sa l s o
needed. The radiation opacity issue [338] for suchplasmas is important for reactor applications, sinceit can signicantly degrade the plasma radiationeciency (absorption of line radiation within theplasma core limits radiation to the plasma surfacerather than from the full volume, as is assumed inthe data presented in Fig. 76).
4.5.5. Summary and extrapolation to ITER
Injection of solid medium- Zand high-Z‘killer’
pellets into present tokamaks shows that such injec-tion can provide the plasma reactivity terminationand rapid radiative cooling functions that are neededfor pellet injection fast shutdown of reactor plasmas.
The penetration of pellets into the target plasma and
the eects of the resulting enhancement of impurityradiation are found to be consistent with expecta-tions, and full mitigation of divertor thermal loadsand substantial mitigation of halo current magni-tudes and vessel vertical forces in after-injectionVDEs are observed. In some cases, it has also beenpossible to avoid VDEs and halo currents completelyby a combination of passive and active vertical sta-
bilization.
The principal discrepancy between theoretical
expectations and observed results in present exper-iments lies in the impurity distribution that isobtained after pellet ablation is complete: the result-ing prole of impurities and added plasma densityis more localized in the outboard portion of theplasma than the ablation source alone would indi-cate. The outward redistribution eect is, however,consistent with the expected diamagnetic expulsion
of deposited particles and is expected to be absent if
shutdown pellets can be injected from the high mag-netic eld side of the plasma.
Present experiments also conrm the predicted
tendency of fast shutdown to generate runaway elec-trons. While runaway generation in present exper-
iments has not been a serious problem, perhaps in
part owing to the eect of MHD ﬂuctuations that fre-
quently accompany injection; projections of runawaygrowth to ITER show that pellet injection inducedrunaway conversion may be a more serious concern.Here, runaway avoidance appears to favour massivedeuterium or helium injection as a shutdown means,but there are presently great uncertainties about theplasma response to the 100 times increase in den-
sity that such an injection would produce. There
are also estimates that more modest 10 times deu-
terium or helium gas injection could enhance resis-tive dissipation of runaway current after conversionoccurs (see Section 4.4). Both demonstration of con-cept experiments to provide data about high den-sity plasma behaviour and better understanding ofthe interaction that appears to exist among runawayproduction, MHD ﬂuctuation losses of runaways andvertical instability after conversion interaction witha high density background plasma are needed to be
able to project the need for and the feasibility of high
density runaway free shutdown to the reactor plasmaregime.
4.6. Disruption avoidance, softening
and amelioration of consequences
Disruptions are presently an unavoidable conse-
quence of tokamak operation, and although imple-mentation of disruption avoidance and/or mitigationmeasures (to be described below) are highly desirableITER design and operation goals, the present designbasis assumption for ITER is that the success of suchmethods cannot yet be guaranteed, and, hence, thatmajor disruptions will occur during an appreciablefraction ( 10%) of ITER pulses (Section 4.1). Conse-
quently, ITER components are designed to withstand
the EM and thermal loading stress and erosion con-sequences of these disruptions (Section 4.2), and pro-vision is made for replacement of eroded divertor sur-face components on a regular basis (see Chapters 1and 4). However, given that the usable lifetime ofthe plasma facing surfaces is nite, and given furtherthat disruption erosion may consume approximately50% of the overall component lifetime, and also given
that reconditioning of plasma facing surfaces after
disruptions will be required before normal plasmaoperation can be resumed, there are clear incentivesin ITER to avoid the occurrence of disruptions when-ever possible and to reduce or mitigate the directand consequential eects of such disruptions that do
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2363

--- Page 115 ---

ITER Physics Basis
occur. This Section describes the possible means for
such avoidance and mitigation of eects. Additional
details of the means by which fast plasma shutdown {
one of the key means for mitigation { can be eectedare presented in Section 4.5. Discussion of integrateddisruption eects modelling { which contributes cen-trally to assessment of mitigation ecacy { is givenin Section 4.7.
Broadly speaking, the subjects of disruption
avoidance and eect amelioration or mitigation canbe divided into three considerations:
(1) prediction of the impending occurrence of dis-
ruption and/or avoidance of disruptions by a
priori avoidance of the operation conditions
that lead to disruption;
(2) intervention, either before disruption precur-
sors occur or before precursor growth leads to
irreversible onset of thermal quench, to activelyeect avoidance; and
(3) amelioration or mitigation of eects, in which
after-onset actions are taken to reduce theseverity or consequential eects of a disruption.
All of these methods have been tested and/or
demonstrated with some degree of success and reac-
tor relevancy in present tokamaks. However, to date,
a completely successful single method or combina-tion of methods that allows reliable avoidance or mit-igation of disruptions has not been demonstrated,and the subjects of disruption prediction, avoidanceand eect mitigation remain as important subjectsof ongoing tokamak R&D.
4.6.1. Disruption avoidance
Disruptions can, in principle, be avoided during
tokamak operation by the provision of an operationscenario that skirts the various operational limits andconditions that cause disruptions and by the provi-sion of adequately reliable plasma operation systems(hardware) and control systems (hardware and con-trol algorithms), such that all critical parameters ofthe prescribed scenario (including suitable pre-pulse
conditioning of the plasma facing surfaces, see Chap-
ter 8) can be reliably obtained and repeated. Selec-tion of a scenario that maintains a relatively widemargin against known disruption initiating condi-tions is an obvious benet in the development of such‘disruption free’ scenarios. Under such conditions,often embodied in present so called ‘set-up’ or ‘refer-
ence pulse’ discharges, but also in standard operation
mode discharges that can produce high plasma per-
formance (for example the standard TFTR ‘super-shot’ used for DT experiments), per pulse disrup-tion rates can be low (e.g. 1% for TFTR super-
shots [339]), and can, in principle, approach zero ifhardware reliability and control of wall conditions(see Section 8.1) can be made suciently high.
Set-up scenarios are often based upon conserva-
tive plasma operation parameters that do not pressclose to known disruption initiating limits or plasmaconguration control limits. The same type of ‘pas-sive’ or ap r i o r i disruption avoidance procedures
can, in principle, be extended to operation scenar-ios that come closer to several operational limits:in these cases (representative of the regime needed
for ITER burning plasma operation), cognizance of
the various operational limits involved must be takeninto account, and provision of real time disruptionprediction (onset warning) capability becomes animportant consideration. Here, monitoring of variousplasma performance indicators, including edge safetyfactor (q
95), internal inductance (to quantify position
in theq{litearing mode stability domain), plasma
density relative to the Greenwald value, radiatedpower fraction, and status of MHD activity become
essential operation scenario development tools. Mon-
itoring of such indicators can provide both indi-rect (via the cognizance of operation sta, typi-cally employed on a next shot basis) and immedi-ate (on-line, by electronic means) during pulse warn-ing of impending or potentially impending onset ofdisruption. Using a proximity or warning indicatorto eect feedback controlled intervention (i.e. feed-back from 
Nto control Paux[273]) can lead to
improved ability to operate reliably near an oper-
ational limit that can initiate disruption (see Chap-ter 8). In the same vein, provision of plasma controlsystems incorporating feedback algorithms to controlsensitive scenario parameters (plasma density, radi-ation fraction, etc.) makes reliable achievement ofthe desired scenario parameters without occurrenceof disruption a matter of closed loop control ratherthan open loop setting of parameters on a before-the-pulse basis [340].
4.6.2. Disruption onset prediction
Basing disruption prediction on single param-
eter proximity or the conﬂuence of several singleparameter limits may not necessarily provide
2364
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 116 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
0 200 400 0 400 0 01.0
0.00.20.40.60.8Neural Network
Prediction
bNaDisruption
Time (ms)bNa
200
Figure 77. Neural net disruption prediction in DIII-D. After training, the neutral net successfully
predicts the Naat which disruption occurs in four plasma discharges in which the disruption threshold
is not well described by Na= constant. Here, Nais an on-line signal that provides a relative measure
of the normalized total beta (Troyon coecient). Depending on the threshold basis chosen, a ‘lookahead’ time 100 ms for prediction of an impending disruption is achieved.
complete certainty for disruption avoidance, or con-
versely, may unduly restrict the accessible operationdomain. A possible improvement here can be madeby implementation of a neural network disruption
predictor [341], wherein multiple disruption related
indicators or diagnostic signals are combined via aneural network to provide a composite impendingdisruption warning indicator that is more robustand reliable than simple single parameter or mul-tiple parameter indicators. There have been recentsuccesses (Fig. 77) in demonstrating both enhanceddisruption predicting capabilities of the method andthe procedures to be used for the on-line ‘training’of the network [342]. However, how to directly apply
training obtained in a present experiment to ITER
or how to shorten the period required for networktraining in ITER (which will require producingdisruptions) remains to be assessed.
Finally, since disruption onset is ultimately deter-
mined by exceeding MHD stability boundaries (Sec-tions 4.1 and 4.2), real time evaluation of plasma
MHD stability (done either via a real time stability
code or ‘look-up’ application of a pre-compiled sta-bility database) can, in principle, be used as a dis-ruption onset predictor, and there are many cases inwhich occurrence of disruption has been closely cor-related (on an after the fact basis) with a correspond-ing prediction of MHD instability onset. Figure 78
shows an example of the success of MHD modellingin predicting the 
Nfor onset of disruption owing to
internal ballooning modes in high performance DT
‘supershots’ in TFTR. The Nat which disruption
occurs can be predicted to an accuracy of a few percent. Provision of adequate and suciently accuratediagnostic data (e.g. plasma ﬂux conguration, pres-sure and current density) is, however, required forapplication of this method, and the eect of measure-ment accuracy on the degree of achievable disruptionpredictive reliability remains to be fully quantied.
The result of any of these prediction methods or
of the more traditional approach of detection of dis-ruption MHD precursor growth is ap r i o r i indication
of the possible or likely occurrence of a disruption.Such indications can form the basis for initiating theavoidance and/or mitigation procedures describedbelow. The time needed for the implementation ofsuch procedures determines the ‘look ahead’ timehorizon capability needed for the predictor. Relia-
bility of the predictor is a second key consideration:
simultaneous achievement of highly reliable predic-tion of disruption, and low (ideally zero) occurrenceof ‘false alarms’ is important. Identication of a suit-able predictor that satises both of these require-ments remains a subject of ongoing R&D.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2365

--- Page 117 ---

ITER Physics Basis
2 1 001234
3 4
Critical bN for ballooning onset (theory)Disruption
t = 3.95 s
t = 3.78 sbN (experimental data)Unstable
Shot #76778
Figure 78. ‘Prediction’ of a beta limit disruption in
TFTR. Actual Nand calculated MHD stability limit
criticalN(dened at r=a=0:33) for a selection of non-
disrupting TFTR supershots (open data symbols, timeand pressure prole vary over the data set, critical 
N
obtained by o-line MHD stability calculation), and com-
parison of the calculated and actual Nfor shot #76778,
a high performance DT pulse, which disrupted upon
reaching the ‘predicted’ stability limit.
4.6.3. Avoidance methods
Avoidance methods fall into two categories: pas-
sive and active. Passive measures involve direct inter-vention to mitigate the underlying cause of the dis-ruption, for example, by reducing the plasma densityif approach to a density limit threshold occurs, orby the addition of auxiliary power if an edge powerbalance condition develops. Preset operation of the
feedback control loops provided in the plasma con-
trol system for ‘control’ of such operation parameters(see Section 2 of Chapter 8) constitutes a rst level ofimplementation of such avoidance techniques [340];with the further addition of making the set points ofsuch control loops plasma state [342] or event (e.g.disruption onset predictor) dependent (e.g. Fig. 79),a disruption avoidance scheme is implemented.
The achievable time response of such indirect
avoidance schemes is determined by the physicsconsiderations involved: for most variants of theschemes, the characteristic time is the plasma energyor particle connement time, or, for measures thatinvolve modication of the current prole, eventhe plasma resistive diusion time. Such meth-
ods are, therefore, usually relatively slow (from a
few seconds to a few tens of seconds in ITER),
and, hence, their application is limited to situa-tions in which a predictor with a sucient ‘lookahead’ time horizon is available. For example, owingto the expected short growth time of traditionalMHD precursors ( 100 ms, see Section 4.1), cou-
pling of such detection to slow intervention schemesis not a useful option for disruption avoidance inITER. The method may be useful in preventing
disruptions with more slowly growing neoclassical
island tearing modes, where the expected growthtimes in ITER are predicted to be long enough(10 s) to make slow indirect intervention possible
(see Section 2.3).
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Time (s)1.01.2
il,HﬁL0.20.61.0
Measured
Set
7.5 MW NBIliOHLHRLHRH
HMode identification
0.8
0.4FNe (1020 s-1)Radiated power fraction
Da intensity (a. u.)
     intensity (a. u.)CIIIdivdynamic control action dynamic 
Figure 79. Plasma control autonomy and disruption
avoidance during an ASDEX-Upgrade discharge. Cor-rective actions (‘repair procedures’, in this case reduc-tion of the injected neon) taken by the control system
upon detection of loss of HRH mode (high radiation H-
mode) allow the mode to be recovered. The disruptionthat would have otherwise occurred is avoided.
The second category of intervention schemes are
‘direct’ schemes that act on a fast ( 1s )t i m e - s c a l e
with active heating or current drive means to locallymodify pressure and/or current density gradients orplasma rotation proles so as to slow or prevent
2366
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 118 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
growth of the MHD instability (see Section 4.1) that
leads to thermal quench onset. Owing to the highly
localized current drive capability that it can pro-
vide, ECCD is the primary means envisioned for suchintervention (see Chapter 6 and Section 2.3), andthere have been some preliminary successes in usingECRH to modify disruption precursor growth (see,for example, [343,344]). However, ICCD and LHCDmay also have potential fast intervention capabilities,as may the application of NBI momentum drive insituations where modication of the plasma rotation
prole can forestall locked mode initiated disruption.
4.6.4. Softening and amelioration of consequences
If a disruption cannot be avoided or if insucient
warning is available for taking intervention action,other measures can be taken to soften or amelio-
rate the resulting sequence of consequential eects
that include the thermal quench, the current quench,vertical instability and in-vessel halo current andconversion to runaway electron current. In presentexperiments where relatively fast acting equilibriumcontrol systems are available, it is possible to takecontrol action to reduce elongation and or plasmacurrent fast enough to at least minimize the verticalinstability consequences of disruption. For example,
the JET plasma control system is now congured
to implement a rapid reduction in plasma elongationupon detection of disruption precursors or actual dis-ruption. This reduction serves to limit the severityof VDEs and the resulting torus vessel vertical andradial forces (see Section 4.3). However, for ITER,such direct mitigation by PF control will not be pos-sible owing to power limitations, and, hence, injec-tion of impurity or hydrogenic species in the form of‘killer pellets’ is proposed as the most benign ‘fast
shutdown’ amelioration means. As is presented in
Section 4.5, in present experiments, impurity pelletinjection has proven to be eective for key aspects ofdisruption amelioration: divertor thermal load reduc-tion and VDE and halo current magnitude reduc-tion have been successfully demonstrated. However,application of such methods in ITER is complicatedby the predicted tendency of such methods to pro-mote wholesale runaway conversion, and identica-
tion of an amelioration method that balances overall
minimization of loading on ITER systems, reliabilityand certainty of action remains an open R&D sub-ject and one in which a capability to model all of themany eects required for prediction of fast shutdowncharacteristics in ITER remains a key R&D subject(see Section 4.7).
4.7. Disruption modelling and integration
of eects
The preceding presentations of the physics bases
for disruption and disruption related eects approachtheir respective subjects and reactor tokamak ex-trapolation principles in a topical manner, as if theeects are separated. However, as has already beennoted in these Sections, there are obvious connec-tions among the topics, and the sequence of disrup-tion events and eects that starts with MHD precur-
sor growth and ends with current termination com-
prises an integrated cause and eect cascade in whichthe preceding phases and events in the sequence playan important role in determining the further evolu-tion of the sequence (Fig. 80). This is particularlytrue for disruptions in elongated tokamaks, wherevertical instability and the resulting dynamic evolu-tion of the plasma equilibrium plays a key role, andfor disruptions in reactor tokamaks with high plasmaenergy levels, where the impurity generation eects
of the energy deposited in the thermal quench phase
can be expected to signicantly modify the subse-quent characteristics of the current quench and run-away conversion phases.
Explicit consideration of the cause and eect
aspect of the disruption sequence is especially appli-cable for prediction of disruption eects in reactor
tokamaks, since mechanisms absent in present dis-
ruptions { especially massive plasma facing surfaceablation and the potential for knock-on avalancherunaway generation { are expected to lead to eectsin reactor tokamak disruptions that may dier fromthe eects and even the disruption sequence seenin present tokamaks. This dierence leads to thestatement made earlier that denitive predictionof disruption characteristics and eects for reactortokamaks will ultimately require a disruption model
that incorporates consideration of all of the relevant
physics mechanisms and their cause and eect inter-connections. The basis for such an ‘integrated’ dis-ruption model is the subject of this Section.
4.7.1. Integrated disruption modelling
The integrated sequence of events that will com-
prise disruption in a reactor tokamak is, in princi-ple, susceptible to predictive modelling or simulation,and simulations that incorporate at least partial con-sideration of the various elementary eects involved
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2367

--- Page 119 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Normal
Precursor
growthThermal
quenchCurrent
quench
Internal reconnection~20 keV~1 keV
Wth conducted to PFC surfaces
(divertor targets and internals)Impurity and 
H/D/T fuellingImpurity and 
H/D/T fuellingWmag radiated to FW Remaining Wmag to FW
(via runaway acceleration and loss)
Runaway e- avalanche (E ~10 MeV)End current~10 eV
Vertical instability and VDEIn-vessel halo current
Figure 80. Disruption and disruption related eects (schematic).
{ dynamic plasma equilibrium evolution, impurity
inﬂux and resulting plasma resistivity increase andradiation losses, and runaway growth and losses {have already proven useful in being able to inter-pret present experimental data and to help showhow these data extrapolate to reactor plasma con-
ditions. In some cases (e.g. current quench dura-
tion or runaway electron conversion by the knock-onavalanche mechanism), the physics eects involvedare relatively simple and ‘single eect’ modellingis sucient to establish a bounding or ‘worst case’basis for the eects that are possible in the reac-tor plasma regime. However, for examples like run-away conversion, where worst case calculations raiseserious design and operation questions, there is a
clear need to extend single eect modelling to a
more integrated basis in which all relevant considera-tions { including the eects of MHD activity, plasmamotion and deformation (including the eects of non-axisymmetry) and the eects of wall generated orsurface generated impurities { are taken into accountin a self-consistent manner. This type of integratedmodelling capability oers the promise of being ableto turn the schematic sequence of eects illustratedin Fig. 80 into quantitative predictions for future
tokamaks and for ITER. Such modelling also oers
the promise of being able to establish likely { asopposed to worst case { bounds for major reactorsystem design basis loading conditions. The result-ing more self-consistent set of design specicationsmay be appreciably easier to satisfy than the presentsimultaneous combination of worst case limits.
The development and validation of an integrated
modelling capability has been identied as an impor-tant goal for ITER physics R&D. The material thatfollows comprises discussion of the key considerationsinvolved and summarizes the status of integratedmodelling development. As the presentation shows,certain modelling basis elements and techniques are
well established and validated, but other key aspectsof integrated modelling remain as future R&D goals.
Modelling the full scope of disruption and ensuing
eects on a ‘rst principles’ MHD instability based
integrated basis is a formidable challenge and one
that is probably not amenable to resolution within aforeseeable period of time. Furthermore, while a pre-dictive model that starts from MHD precursor devel-opment is a laudable physics understanding goal, thecomplexities of the non-linear MHD evolution thatlead to onset of the thermal quench, the diculties ofmodelling the resulting stochastic three dimensionalMHD eects on energy and particle transport, and
the fact that the important design relevant conse-
quences of disruptions start with onset of the ther-mal quench (fast- losses owing to MHD precursors
are an exception, see Section 4.5), a more direct twodimensional approach that starts with empirical orsemi-empirical models of the thermal quench and theensuing current prole broadening is indicated. Fig-ure 81 shows a schematic illustration of the resultingmodelling approach, with various key modelling basiselements (or modules) indicated. This schematic is
presented here to provide a framework for the dis-
cussion of the various modelling elements that areneeded for an integrated model: it is not intended tonecessarily be a denitive concept for how an inte-grated model should be congured.
As Fig. 81 shows, a two dimensional dynamic
equilibrium and transport model forms the kernelof the disruption modelling capability and provides
a self-consistent means of dynamically accounting
for the plasma energy and particle (both thermaland superthermal) inventories. Accounting for themagnitude and evolution of these inventories, par-ticularly the current prole, is a key considerationthat is central to calculating the plasma equilibrium
2368
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 120 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
in a manner that self-consistently reﬂects both the
plasma evolution and the eects of the surrounding
electromagnetic environment (i.e. the toroidal and
poloidal electrical conductivities and electrical con-nection scheme of the torus vessel and in-vessel sys-tems and also the conguration of the PF coil sys-tem). For disruptions with time-scales comparable toor longer than the response time of the plasma equi-librium control system, consideration of passive andactive response of the PF system is also required.
In the basic coupled model schematic illustrated
in Fig. 81, the evolution of the plasma energyand particle content and of the resulting current
and pressure proles are calculated internally by
means of a 1.5 dimensional (ﬂux surface averaged)transport model that is internally coupled to theGrad{Shafranov two dimensional equilibrium solver.The eects of disruption onset (thermal and currentquench) are simulated by corresponding transientenhancements of the energy diusion and particletransport coecients and by transient and/or per-manent enhancement of the plasma resistivity. Theenhancement factors and durations of the enhance-
ments are chosen (for the case of interpretation of
experimental data) to achieve the observed thermaland current quench durations and the observed pos-itive current rise and/or current prole broadening(l
idecrease). For simulations of disruptions in future
reactor tokamaks, the enhancement parameters aretypically chosen to yield the projected thermal andcurrent quench durations (see Section 4.2) or canbe systematically varied to conduct parametricstudies of the sensitivity of disruption eects to
the enhancement parameters and other uncertain
modelling basis parameters (see below).
Simulation of the underlying MHD instability
mechanisms responsible for disruption onset bytransport and/or resistivity enhancement ensuresthat the resulting calculation of the plasma evolu-tion is based upon a fully self-consistent account-ing of plasma energy, particle content and entropy.However, it is also possible to calculate the equi-librium evolution without transport calculations byinstead prescribing the time evolution of the equilib-
rium parameters ( l
iandp) and the plasma resistiv-
ity or temperature during the current decay. Here itis necessary to select prole evolutions that mimiceither the experimental data (including the afterthermal quench current rise, if present) or whichyield similarly self-consistent results for the simula-tion of future tokamak disruptions.
Three auxiliary modules are shown in Fig. 81:these modules support, respectively, axisymmetric
halo current modelling (essential to realistic mod-
elling of the VDE phase of a disruption), a pel-
let/impurity injection modelling module (for studyof fast shutdown implementation and eects), anda plasma facing surface particle and impurity sourcemodel. These modules plus the two dimensional equi-librium/inventory kernel constitute what can be con-sidered to be a basic ‘fully integrated’ disruptionmodel.
Options for MHD stability assessment and self-
consistent instability (ﬂuctuation) calculations, three
dimensional plasma deformation calculations (withlinkage to the halo current model), and for detailedplasma facing surface power deposition and abla-tion calculations are also shown. These additions areoptional, in part owing to the fact that they consti-tute renements to the basic disruption/VDE modeland in part owing to the likelihood that the requiredmodelling calculations may have to be implementedseparately (o-line, so to speak) from the basic inte-
grated model calculations.
A runaway electron model is also shown. This
model, which is optional for the case of presentexperiments where runaway eects are negligible, islikely critical to the modelling of reactor disruptions,VDEs and fast shutdown, where runaway conversioneects are potentially much more signicant (see Sec-tions 4.4 and 4.5).
Simplication of the basic model to a two dimen-
sional equilibrium basis is a presently necessaryaspect of integrated disruption modelling. A fullyself-consistent three dimensional MHD model ofequilibrium and stability is, in principle, desirable,but the computational challenges are signicant andeven simplied models of such eects presently lie atthe boundary of the state of the art (see further dis-cussion of three dimensional and MHD ﬂuctuationeects below).
4.7.2. Dynamic equilibrium modelling of
disruptions and VDEs
Modelling eorts aimed at simulating disruption
eects based on two dimensional dynamic equilib-rium models have been underway for a number of
years and have been applied for both interpreta-
tion of data from present experiments and for mak-ing estimates of disruption and VDE characteristicsin reactor tokamaks and various ITER designs. Todate, the majority of this data interpretation andfuture tokamak simulation eort has been conducted
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2369

--- Page 121 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Coupled 2-D Dynamic Equilibrium and Transport Model
Free-Boundary 
2-D Equilibrium
(Grad-Shafranov
Solver)1.5-D Energy and 
Particle and j(r) 
Inventory/Transport
(Thermal plasma, 
Ohmic and a-heating
radiation, etc.) 2-D Grid or 
Finite Element
Representation of
Plasma, Limiter 
and Vessel + PF
Conductors Time Advancement Algorithm
Prescribed
Plasma Profile
Evolution:
li(t), bp(t), etc.
Halo Current
Model
Runaway 
Electron Model 
(source, transport, 
losses)Poloidal Field 
System Control
Algorithm
Auxiliary Heating 
and/or Current Drive
Fuel and/or Impurity
Sources (Injection)
Plasma-Wall Interaction
Fuel/Impurity Source(s)
Plasma Boundary and/or 
Plasma-Wall Interaction Model(s) 
(edge and divertor plasma, wall and 
divertor heat and particle fluxes, etc.)MHD Stability and Fluctuations
(ideal, sawteeth, resistive, 
neoclassical islands, ELMs,TAEs 
3-D perturbations, etc.)Magnetics Data:
Y, j, p, IPF, IVV, Ihalo,in-vessel , etc.Kinetics Data:
ne, ni, nimp, Te, Ti, 
a and ion populations,
radiation, particle and energy 
losses, etc.Disruption Simulation:
c, D, r enhancement
Figure 81. Integrated disruption model schematic with basic and optional modelling elements.
Major interactions in the model are identied (see text below) but the interactions shown are notintended to be exhaustive.
with the Tokamak Simulation Code (TSC) [345],
but, more recently, there has been similar develop-ment and application of disruption and VDE sim-ulation models embodied in the DINA [346] andMAXFEA [347] dynamic equilibrium codes. A stan-dard TSC disruption model has been developed thatcan simulate many features of a disrupting plasma
during both the thermal quench and current quench
phases. When the predictions of this model have beencompared with detailed experimental data, gener-ally good agreement is found [280, 284, 348]. Thisagreement, however, comes from adjustment of keymodelling parameters in the simulation to matchexperimental results, and while there is a reason-able basis for then extrapolating these parametersto future tokamaks, the TSC, and all similar disrup-tion models, are still semi-empirical, and the result-
ing predictions for future tokamaks therefore remain
somewhat sensitive to the extrapolation basis. Nev-ertheless, the TSC and similar models provide thebest present basis for self-consistently predicting theanticipated characteristics of future tokamak disrup-tions and VDEs.
4.7.2.1. Disruption plasma load cases
Estimation of the electromagnetic loads that dis-
ruptions and VDEs produce in reactor tokamaktorus vessel and in-vessel components is a key con-
sideration in the concept development and designof such future tokamaks. The TSC code and dis-ruption/VDE model are being used to provide anaxisymmetric model of a disrupting plasma to com-pute loads for the engineering analysis of the internalcomponents of the ITER vacuum vessel and the vac-
uum vessel itself. A detailed TSC structural model
[349] with 1154 laments was built on the then cur-rent (1996) basis of the ITER geometry, modied toaccount for more recent developments ( ca.1997) in
the rst wall design. The axisymmetric equivalentITER structure model in TSC incorporates mod-elling features found to be important by the threedimensional structure analysis code SPARC [350].The structure model is implemented by the use of15 cm by 15 cm ( RZ) zones that have spec-
ied toroidal conductivity, or for electrically iso-
lated components with no continuous toroidal con-nection (e.g. the nuclear shield and divertor cas-sette modules) groups of zones with zero net currentconstraints imposed. The model also has poloidalconnections and connection breaks dened, which,respectively, allow and prevent poloidal current ﬂow.These modelling features permit the full toroidal andpoloidal complexity poloidal of the ITER vessel and
in-vessel structures to be described in an equiva-
lent two dimensional axisymmetric modelling sense.
2370
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 122 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
A poloidal cross-section representation of the overall
model appears in Fig. 82.
To date, ve design basis disruption scenarios have
been developed with TSC for the ITER 21 MA, 5.7 Tdesign. These scenarios dier in details of the ini-tial conditions (initial Zdisplacement) and in the
halo temperature. In all cases, the disruption wasmodelled by letting the thermal conduction suddenly
increase to a value 10
6times its disruptive level. The
scenarios include four VDE cases and one fast radialdisruption case. The initial equilibrium for all casescorresponded closely to ITER end-of-burn equilib-rium with
p=0:9a n dli(3) = 0:9.
R (m)4-4
-6-22
0468
-86 8 10 12Z (m)Itor (MA)
7.6
5.211.118.820.7
16.7
14.4TSC 970419E (Slow VDE down, 2900 – 3800 ms)
21.0
Figure 82. Plasma conguration and toroidal current
for a slow VDE in ITER. The TSC simulation model.Compare with the conguration evolution for the AlcatorC-Mod ‘vertical disruption’ shown in Fig. 59, Section 4.3.
The VDE cases consist of an upward or downward
vertical drift lasting until q95=1:5, a fast ( 2m s )
thermal quench, and a current quench of duration11{900 ms. Contributions from toroidal currents,induced poloidal currents, and ‘plasma{wall’ poloidalcurrent ﬂowing between plasma halo and plasma fac-ing components were included in the analysis. The
slowest VDE case (900 ms current quench, shown
in Fig. 82) gave the largest plasma{wall poloidal
current, 5.0 MA, the largest poloidal current in thestructure, 3.9 MA, and the extreme net vertical forceon the entire structure, −120 MN (Fig. 83). How-
ever, at least three additional cases are requiredto specify the extreme pressures in the ITER ves-sel, backplate divertor components, rst wall, andradial connecting straps. For a given case, the ver-tical force evolution diers signicantly for dier-
ent structural components. More recent TSC sim-
ulations have also explored the plasma/halo tem-perature modelling parameter sensitivities of disrup-tion characteristics and vessel and in-vessel loadings.These sensitivity studies have yielded results similarto the DINA sensitivity studies described below.
0 2000 4000 60000510152025
-50510
t (ms)Current (MA), F z (MN)
Magnetic Axis Position (m)
Halo (poloidal, FW)Plasma (toroidal)Radius (R m)
Height (Z m)
VVBPVV + BP-0.1*Fz, totalSLOW VDE (TSC 970419E)
Figure 83. Plasma, torus vacuum vessel (VV) and back-
plate (BP) toroidal currents and in-vessel poloidal halocurrent and axial ( Z) force for the slow ITER VDE shown
in Fig. 82. Compare with the current waveforms for theAlcator C-Mod VDE shown in Fig. 59, Section 4.3.
The TSC simulations of the type shown above
incorporate a detailed in-vessel and vessel model(note the number of modelling elements shown inFig. 82) and, hence, yield great detail at the individ-ual modelling element level about the resulting timehistories of the in-vessel currents and forces. Detailedknowledge of the component level variation of the
magnitude and time history forces is potentially
important for validation of the structural responseof the overall vessel and in-vessel system and for thedesign of the component attachment and electricalconnections. However, each TSC simulation requiressignicant execution time on a major computer, so it
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2371

--- Page 123 ---

ITER Physics Basis
is not possible to easily study many disruption sce-
nario cases or to exhaustively explore the eects of
variations in, for example, the halo modelling basis
parameters. To perform these sensitivity and scop-ing type of calculations, a large number of disruptionsimulations using the DINA code [346,351] have alsobeen performed. These include simulations of DIII-D and ITER disruptions. The DINA code utilizesa semi-analytic halo model and prescribed plasmaprole evolutions. In its typical embodiment, it ismuch faster to run than TSC, but it does not have
the same level of structural detail with regard to the
in-vessel halo currents. It has therefore been usedto explore worst case disruptions for ITER and totest sensitivities to plasma core and halo modellingassumptions [352] (Fig. 84). When the DINA sim-ulations were compared with a corresponding TSCcase and with limited TSC halo parameter variationscans, the results from the two codes are found to bein substantial agreement.
0 2 4 6 8 10050100150200250
0.00.51.01.52.02.5
Plasma temperature (Z eff = 1) (eV)
Current decay time (ms)Peak in-vessel halo current (MA)ITER upward-going  VDEs, I p0 = 21 MA
Thalo = Tcore
Thalo = Tcore/2
tdecayIhalo,max
Figure 84. Halo current magnitude and current decay
time versus plasma temperature and halo temperature(=T
coreorTcore=2), as obtained in DINA simulations
of upward going ITER VDEs. The minimum projectedITER current quench duration of 50 ms corresponds forthese two halo assumptions to core temperatures of 3and 4.5 eV (consistent with impurity radiation cooling,
see Section 4.2) and corresponding peak in-vessel halo
currents of about 1.6 MA and 1.2 MA. The tendency ofpeak halo current to increase with higher core and/orhalo temperature (and, hence, also with increasing cur-rent quench duration) is clearly shown.
4.7.3. Pellet injection and fast shutdown modelling
Several special purpose models of impurity injec-
tion shutdown in tokamaks (see Section 4.5) andthe associated development of runaway electrons
have begun to appear [297,353]. A TSC ‘killer pel-
let’ modelling is being developed and veried by
detailed modelling of well diagnosed experiments inTFTR, DIII-D and JT-60 (see Section 4.5), and therehas been preliminary application of the model toITER. TSC now incorporates a multi-pellet abla-tion and mass distribution model (including theeects of ‘back averaging’, see Section 4.5), the fullADPAC impurity radiation model, and criteria toindicate when the evolving two dimensional equilib-
rium becomes unstable to three dimensional modes.
The TFTR modelling worked very well [354], withTSC being able to reproduce the plasma current, OHcurrent, diamagnetic loop, and bolometry measure-ments on the low Krypton concentration shots thatwere predicted to remain axisymmetric stable, butunable to directly predict the rapid current decay inthe high Krypton concentration shots. The stabilityindications in TSC did predict that the high Kryp-ton concentration shots should become MHD unsta-
ble: this is consistent with the rapid current decay
observed for the high-Kr cases. Coupling of a calcu-lation of the resulting three dimensional MHD ﬂuctu-ations to the basic two dimensional TSC plasma evo-lution model remains as a future TSC model devel-opment task, as does inclusion of a three dimensionalplasma deformation halo current asymmetry modeland a runaway electron model.
A knock-on avalanche runaway conversion model
based upon the formulation given in Section 4.4 hasrecently been incorporated in the DINA disruptionmodel and has been used to simulate runaway con-version and deposition in upward going ITER VDEs(see data in Fig. 69, Section 4.4.4). The results ofthis rst two dimensional dynamic modelling of run-away conversion conrm the quantitative estimatesof runaway conversion obtained with one dimensional
‘static’ models [297], albeit with the caveat common
to all present runaway models that the possible lossenhancing eects of MHD ﬂuctuations on runawaylosses during the avalanche conversion phase are notyet incorporated (see discussion in Sections 4.4.4and 4.4.5).
For future application of TSC (or other similar
codes) to ITER shutdown with low- Zpellets, the
energy transport model may need to include a better
calculation of hydrogenic and low- Zimpurity radi-
ation transport. Here, calculations of hydrogen andimpurity line radiation transport at high densitieswith the CRETIN code [355] show that line radiation‘trapping’ eects can be important and can apprecia-
2372
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 124 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
bly decrease radiative cooling for high density shut-
down. This nding indicates that detailed radiation
transport calculations may need to be incorporated
or simulated in modelling of low- Zinjection shut-
down scenarios for ITER and reactor tokamaks.
4.7.4. Halo current models
The halo current models incorporated in present
two dimensional equilibrium models are axisymmet-ric and semi-empirical: one typically species thehalo temperature (or equivalent electrical conduc-tivity) plus the halo width. The eects of toroidalasymmetry, which are not incorporated in such mod-
els, are presently added in an ad hoc manner in the
subsequent ‘engineering application’ of the modellingdata. A more self-consistent and/or ‘physics based’non-axisymmetric halo current model is highly desir-able, but the challenges of the required three dimen-sional equilibrium and stability modelling requiredhave not yet been resolved and experimental datarelating halo current asymmetry to three dimen-sional plasma column deformation are too sparse to
provide anything more than initial insight into the
possible cause (or causes) of the halo current toroidalasymmetry. Here, a relatively simple model [290] hasbeen developed by Pomphrey and co-workers of athree dimensional helical kink deformed plasma incontact with a wall, leading to a non-axisymmetrichalo current pattern. This model leads to a rela-tion between halo current fraction, I
H=IP, and halo
toroidal peaking factor, TPF, that depends only ona single parameter,  a=a, which measures the sat-
urated amplitude of the kink instability. Choosing
a=a < 0:3 gives good agreement with non-linear
three dimensional MHD [356] calculations for themaximum saturated amplitude of an external kinkmode, and also seems to encompass the experimen-tal data (see Section 4.3).
Along similar lines, insight into the origin of the
lateral forces on the JET vacuum vessel associatedwith VDEs has been obtained in terms of correspond-ing measurements of a tilted and radially displacedplasma column [288]. However, predictive applica-tion of this modelling premise or the Pomphrey three
dimensional deformation premise into a two dimen-
sional simulation code remains as a future disruptionmodel development and verication task.
4.7.5. Further model development
The A
Thermal code [357], developed by A. Has-
sanein, includes a very complete description of theeects of large heat ﬂuxes on the divertor and rst
wall. Coupling this code to the TSC code to more
self-consistently calculate the impurity inﬂux into
the plasma during the disruption from the divertorregion has been identied as a future possibility.
For the killer pellet modelling, a number of eects
need to be included in the modelling. In particular,it is necessary to incorporate the TFTR observa-
tion [318] that a sawtooth is induced when the pellet
reaches the q= 1 surface, include a runaway elec-
tron model, develop a model for runaway interactionwith wall, develop a better characterization of theonset and the consequences of a MHD event, andcontinue to rene the model by detailed calibrationwith experiments.
Three dimensional MHD code calculations are
needed to better understand the physical basis forthe dierence between impurity pellet fuelling forinside and outside launch, to better understand howa pellet induces a MHD event, and to understandunder what circumstances magnetic surfaces reformduring a disruption, and for a more self-consistentcalculation of non-axisymmetric halo currents dur-
ing a disruption.
References
[1] Boucher, D., Louche, F., Karulin, N., ITER Joint
Central Team, ITER Home Teams, ITER Fusion
Performance Projections, in Controlled Fusion
and Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur. Conf.Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part III, Euro-
pean Physical Society, Geneva (1997) 953{957.
[2] Freidberg, J., Ideal Magnetohydrodynamics,
Plenum Press, New York, NY (1987).
[3] Troyon, F., Gruber, R., Saurenmann, H., Semer-
mzato, S., Succi, S., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion
26(1984) 209.
[4] Bateman, G., MHD Instabilities, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, CA (1978).
[5] Lao, L.L., St. John, H., Stambaugh, R.D., Kell-
man, A.G., Pfeier, W., Reconstruction of currentprole parameters and plasma shapes in tokamaks,
Nucl. Fusion 25(1985) 1611.
[6] Lao, L.L., Ferron, J.R., Groebner, R.J., Howl, W.,
St. John, H., Strait, E.J., Taylor, T.S., Equilib-
rium analysis of current proles in tokamaks, Nucl.
Fusion 30(1990) 1035.
[7] Helton, F.J., Wang, T.S., MHD equilibrium in non-
circular tokamak with eld-shaping coil systems,
Nucl. Fusion 18(1978) 1523.
[8] Wesley, J., Bartels, H.W., Boucher, D., Costley,
A., Dekock, L., Gribov, Y.U., Huguet, M., Janes-
chitz, G., Mondino, P.L., Mukhovatov, V., Por-
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2373

--- Page 125 ---

ITER Physics Basis
tone, A., Sugihara, M., Yonekawa, I., Plasma con-
trol requirements and concepts for ITER, Fusion
Technol. 32(1997) 495.
[9] Troyon, F., et al., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion
26(1984) 209.
[10] Strait, E.J., Stability of high beta tokamak plas-
mas, Phys. Plasmas 1(1994) 1415.
[11] Sauter, O., Lahaye, R.J., Chang, Z., Gates, D.A.,
Kamada, Y., Zohm, H., Bondeson, A., Boucher,D., Callen, J.D., Chu, M.S., Gianakon, T.A., Gru-
b e r ,O . ,H a r v e y ,R . W . ,H e g n a ,C . C . ,L a o ,L . L . ,
Monticello, D.A., Perkins, F., Pletzer, A., Reiman,
A.H., Rosenbluth, M., Strait, M.S., Taylor, T.S.,
Turnbull, A.D., Waelbroeck, F., Wesley, J.C., Wil-son, H.R., Yoshino, H., Beta limits in long-pulse
tokamak discharges, Phys. Plasmas 4(1997) 1654.
[12] Huysmans, G.T.A., Cordey, G., Gormezano, C.,
Sips, A.C.C., Tubbing, B.D.J., 
dependence
of the beta limit in JET, in Controlled Fusion
and Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur. Conf.Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part IV, Euro-
pean Physical Society, Geneva (1997), 1857{1860.
[13] Taylor, T.S., Lazarus, E.A., Chu, M.S., Ferron,
J . R . ,H e l t o n ,F . J . ,H o w l ,W . ,J a c k s o n ,G . L . ,
Jensen, T.H., Kamada, Y., Kellman, A.G., Lao,
L.L., La Haye, R.J., Leuer, J.A., Lister, J.B.,Osborne, T.H., Snider, R.T., Stambaugh, R.D.,
Strait, E.J., Turnbull, A.D., Prole optimization
and high-beta dischargaes and stability of high-elongation plasmas in the DIII-D tokamak, in
Plasma Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion
Research 1990 (Proc. 13th Int. Conf. WashingtonDC, 1990), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1991), 177{194.
[14] Kamada, Y., Yoshino, R., Ushigusa, K., Neyatani,
Y., Oikawa, T., Naito, O., Tokuda, S., Shirai, H.,Takizuka, T., Ozeki, T., Azumi, M., Hatae, T.,
F u j i t a ,T . ,T a k e j i ,S . ,M a t s u k a w a ,M . ,K o i d e ,Y . ,
Fukuda, T., Ishida, S., JT-60 Team, High triangu-
larity discharges with improved stability and con-
nement in JT-60U, in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc.16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1, IAEA,
Vienna (1997) 247{258.
[15] Rosenbluth, M.N., Hogan, J., Boucher, D., Bonde-
son, A., Barabaschi, P., Coppi, B., Degtyarev, L.,
Haney, S.W., Goedbloed, H., Hender, T.C.C., Hol-
ties, H., Huysmans, G., Kerner, W., Manickam, J.,Martynov, A.A., Medvedev, S., Monticello, D.A.,
Ozeki, T., Peralstein, L.D., Perkins, F., Pletzer,
A., Porcelli, F., Rebut, P.H., Tokuda, S., Turn-bull, A.D., Villard, L., Wesley, J., ITER Joint
Central Team, ITER Home Teams, ITER Plasma
Modeling and MHD Stability Limits, in PlasmaPhysics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research
1994 (Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Seville, 1994), Vol. 2,
IAEA, Vienna (1995) 517{524.
[16] Bondeson, A., Villard, L., Ward, D.J., Wermeille,D., Goedbloed, J.P., Holties, H.A., Hender, T.C.,
Huysmans, G.T.A., Kerner, W., MHD stability of
ITER equilibria, NET Rep. 107, Commission ofthe European Communities, DG XII (1995).
[17] Tokuda, S., Ozeki, T., Stability analysis of exter-
nal kink mode for ITER L-mode proles, JAERIResearch Rep. 94{013 (1994). Tokuda, S., Ozeki,
T., Stability analysis of external kink mode for
ITER H-mode proles, JAERI Research Rep. 94{030 (1994).
[18] Turnbull, A.D., Pearlstein, L.D., Bulmer, R., Lao,
L.L., La Haye, R.J., On the operational beta
limit in sawtoothing discharges, General Atomics
Rep. GA{A22907 (submitted to Nuclear Fusion).
[19] Zohm, H., Edge localized modes (ELMs), Plasma
Phys. Control. Fusion 38(1996) 105.
[20] Kessel, C., Manickam, J., Rewoldt, G., Tang,
T.M., Improved plasma performance in tokamaks
with negative magnetic shear, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72
(1994) 1212.
[21] Ozeki, T., Azumi, M., Ishida, S., Fujita, T., Viola-
tion of the Mercier criterion in reversed shear con-
nement conguration in tokamaks, Plasma Phys.Control. Fusion 40(1998) 871.
[22] Ishida, S., Fujita, T., Akasaka, H., Akino, N.,
Annou, K., Aoyagi, T., Arai, T., Arakawa, K.,Azumi, M., Budny, R., Chiba, S., Da Costa,
O., Ebisawa, N., Fujii, T., Fukuda, T., Funa-
hasi, A., Grisham, L., Gunji, S., Hamamatsu, K.,Hasegawa, Y., Hatae, T., Higashijima, S., Hirat-
suka, H., Hirayama, S., Honda, A., Honda, M.,
Hosogane, N., Ichige, N., Ide, S., Ikeda, Y., Isaka,M., Isayama, A., Isei, N., Ishii, Y., Isozaki, N.,
Itami, K., Itoh, T., Iwahashi, T., Kamada, Y.,
Kaminaga, A., Kashiwabara, T., Kawai, M., Kawa-m a t a ,Y . ,K a w a n o ,Y . ,K a z a m a ,D . ,K a z a m a ,
M., Kikuchi, M., Kimura, H., Kimura, T., Kishi-
moto, H., Kishimoto, Y., Kitamura, S., Kiyono,
K., Kodama, K., Koide, Y., Kokusen, S., Kon-
doh, T., Konoshima, S., Koog, J., Kramer, G.J.,Kubo, H., Kurihara, K., Kurita, G., Kuriyama, M.,
Kusama, Y., Masaki, K., Matsuda, T., Matsumoto,
T., Matukawa, M., Miuri, T., Miya, N., Miyachi,K., Miyata, H., Miyo, Y., Mogaki, K., Mori, M.,
Morimoto, M., Morioka, S., Moriyama, S., Nagami,
M., Nagashima, A., Nagashima, K., Nagaya, S.,Naito, O., Nakamura, Y., Nemoto, M., Neyatani,
Y., Nishitani, T., Ogiwara, N., Ohga, T., Ohsawa,
M . ,O h s h i m a ,T . ,O i k a w a ,T . ,O k a b e ,T . ,O k a n o ,J., Omori, K., Onose, Y., Oohara, H., Ozeki, T.,
Saidoh, M., Saigusa, M., Saito, N., Sukasai, A.,
Sakata, S., Sakurai, S., Sasajima, T., Sato, M.,Scott, S.D., Seimiya, M., Seiki, H., Seki, M., Shi-
mada, M., Shimuzu, K., Shimono, M., Shinozaki,
S., Shirai, H., Shitomi, M., Suganuma, K., Sugie,T., Sunaoshi, H., Takahashi, M., Takahashi, S.,
2374 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 126 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Takeji, S., Takenaga, H., Takizuka, T., Tamai, H.,
Terakado, M., Tobita, K., Tokuda, S., Totsuka,
T., Toyokawa, Y., Toyoshima, N., Tsuchiya, K.,Tsugita, Tsukahara, Y., Tuda, T., Uramoto, Y.,
Ushigusa, K., Usui, K., Yagyu, J., Yamagiwa, M.,
Yamamoto, M., Yamamoto, T., Yamashita, O.,Yokokura, K., Yoshida, H., Yoshida, M., Yoshino,
R., Achievement of high fusion performance in JT-
60U reversed shear discharges, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79
(1997) 3917.
[23] La Haye, R.J., Callen, J.D., Gianakon, T.A.,
Hegna, C.C., Lao, L.L., Ren, C., Sauter, O., Strait,
E.J., Taylor, T.S., Wilson, H.R., Metastable beta
limit in DIII-D, in Controlled Fusion and PlasmaPhysics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur. Conf. Berchtesgar-
den, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part III, European Physical
Society, Geneva (1997) 1121{1244.
[24] Nave, M.F.F., Ali-Arshad, S., Alper, B., Balet,
B., de Blank, H.J., Borba, D., Challis, C.D.,
Von Hellerman, M.G., Hender, T.C., Huysmans,G.T.A., Kerner, W., Kramer, G.J., Porcelli, F.,
O’Rourke, J., Porte, L., Sadler, G.J., Smeuders,
P., Sips, A.C.C., Stubbereld, P.M., Stork, D.,Reichle, R., Wesson, J.A., Zwingmann, W., MHD
activity in JET hot ion H-mode discharges, Nucl.
Fusion 35(1995) 409.
[25] Campbell, D.J., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 60(1988)
2148.
[26] Bussac, M.N., Pellat, R., Edery, D., Soule, J.L.,
P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 35(1975) 1638.
[27] L¨ utjens, H., Bondeson, A., Vlad, G., Ideal MHD
stability of internal kinks in circular and shapedtokamaks, Nucl. Fusion 32(1992) 1625.
[28] Shafranov, V.D., Zh. Tech. Fiz. 40(1970) 241
( S o v .P h y s .T e c h .P h y s . 15(1970) 175.)
[29] Von Goeler, Stodiek, S., Sautho, N., Phys. Rev.
Lett. 33(1974) 1201.
[30] Rosenbluth, M.N., Dagazian, R.Y., Rutherford,
P.H., Phys. Fluids 16(1973) 1894.
[31] Coppi, B., Galvao, R., Pellat, R., Rosenbluth,
M.N., Rutherford, P.H., Fiz. Plazmy 2(1976) 961.
(Sov. J. Plasma Phys. 2(1976) 533.)
[32] Kadomtsev, B.B., Fiz. Plazmy 1(1975) 710. (Sov.
J. Plasma Phys. 1(1976) 389.)
[33] Sweet, P.A., in Electromagnetic Phenomena in
Cosmic Physics (ed. B. Lenhert), Cambridge Uni-versity Press (1958) 123.
[34] Parker, E.N., J. Geophys. Res. 62(1957) 509.
[35] Danilov, A.F., Dnestrovski, Y.U.N., Kostomarov,
D.P., Popov, A.M., Fiz. Plazmy 2(1976) 187. (Sov.
J. Plasma Phys. 2(1976) 93.)
[36] Waddell, B.V., Monticello, D.A., Rosenbluth,
M . N . ,W h i t e ,R . B . ,N u c l .F u s i o n 16(1976) 528.
Park, W., Monticello, D.A., White, R.B., Jardin,
S.C., Non-linear saturation of the internal kinkmode, Nucl. Fusion 20(1980) 1181.[37] Ara, G., et al., Ann. Phys. 112(1978) 443.
[38] Dubois, M.A., Marty, D.A., Pochelon, G., Method
of cartography of q= 1 islands during sawtooth
activity in tokamaks, Nucl. Fusion 20(1980) 1355.
[39] Edwards, A.W., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 57(1986)
210.
[40] Soltwisch, H., Stodiek, W., Manickam, J., Schl¨ uter,
J., Plasma Phys. Contr. Nuclear Fusion Res.
1(1986) 433 (Vol. 1, p. 263 (Kyoto Proc.)).
O’Rourke, J., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 30
(1991) 1475. Weller, A., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
59(1987) 2303. Gill, R.D., Edwards, A.W., Pasini,
D., Weller, A., Snake-like density perturbations in
JET, Nucl. Fusion 32(1992) 723. Osborne, T., et
al., Phys Rev. Lett. 49(1982) 734.
[41] Nagayama, Y., Yamada, M., Park, W., Frederick-
son, E.D., Janos, A.C., McGuire, K.M., Taylor, G.,Tomography of full sawtooth crashes on the toka-
mak fusion test reactor, Phys. Plasmas 3(1996)
1647.
[42] Levinton, F.M., Batha, S.H., Yamada, M., Zarn-
stro, M.C., Phys. Fluids B 5(1993) 2554.
[43] Wroblewski, D., Huang, L.K., Moos, H.W., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 61(1988) 1724. Weisen, H., Borg, G.,
Joye, B., Lister, J.B., Phys. Rev. Lett. 62(1989)
434.
[44] Campbell, D.J., Gill, R.D., Gowers, C.W., Wesson,
J.A., Bartlett, D.V., Best, C.H., Coda, S., Costley,
A.E., Edwards, A., Kissel, S.E., Niestadt, R.M.,Piekaar, H.W., Prentice, R., Ross, R.T., Tubbing,
B.J.D., Sawtooth activity in ohmically heated JET
plasmas, Nucl. Fusion 26(1986) 1085.
[45] Wesson, J.A., Edwards, A.W., Granetz, R.S.,
Spontaneous m= 1 instability in the JET saw-
tooth collapse, Nucl. Fusion 31(1991) 111.
[46] Pfeier, W., Double-sawtooth oscillations in the
doublet III tokamak, Nucl. Fusion 25(1985) 673.
[47] Campbell, D., Pearson, D., JET Joint Undertak-
ing, Abingdon, Empirical scaling laws for the saw-
tooth period, personal communication.
[48] Wesson, J.A., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 28
(1986) 243.
[49] Migliuolo, S., Theory of ideal and resistive m=1
modes in tokamaks, Nucl. Fusion 33(1993) 1721.
[50] Drake, J.F., Antonsen, T.M., Hassam, A.B.,
Gladd, N.T., Stabilization of the tearing mode inhigh-temperature plasma, Phys. Fluids 26(1983)
2509.
[51] Porcelli, F., Migliuolo, S., Ion viscosity stabiliza-
tion of resistive internal kink modes, Phys. Fluids
29(1996) 1741.
[52] Migliuolo, S., Pegoraro, F., Porcelli, F., Stabiliza-
tion of collisional drift-tearing modes at the break-
down of the constant-Ψ approximation, Phys. Flu-
ids B 3(1991) 1338.
[53] Cowley, S.C., Kulsrud, R.M., Hahm, T.S., Linear
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2375

--- Page 127 ---

ITER Physics Basis
stability of tearing modes, Phys. Fluids 29(1986)
3230.
[54] Porcelli, F., Collisionless m=1t e a r i n gm o d e ,
P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 66(1991) 425.
[55] Zakharov, L., Rogers, B., Two-ﬂuid magnetohy-
drodynamic description of the internal kink modein tokamaks, Phys. Fluids B 4(1992) 3285.
[56] Levinton, F.M., Zahkarov, L., Batha, S.H., Man-
ickam, J., Zarnstor, M.C., Stabilization and onsetof sawteeth in TFTR, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72(1994)
2895.
[57] Porcelli, F., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 33,
(1991) 1601 (and references therein).
[58] McGuire, K., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 50(1983)
891.
[59] Porcelli, F., Boucher, D., Rosenbluth, M.N., Model
for the sawtooth period and amplitude, PlasmaPhys. Control. Fusion 38(1996) 2163.
[60] Kruskal, M.D., Oberman, C.R., Phys. Fluids 1
(1958) 275.
[61] Antonsen, T.M., Bondeson, A., Inﬂuence of
trapped thermal particles on internal kink modes
in high temperature tokamaks, Phys. Fluids B 5
(1993) 4090.
[62] Fogaccia, G., Romanelli, F., On the stability of the
internal kink mode in the banana regime, Phys.Plasmas 2(1995) 227.
[63] Wesson, J.A., Sawtooth reconnection, Nucl. Fusion
30(1990) 2545.
[64] Ottaviani, M., Porcelli, F., Nonlinear collisionless
magnetic reconnection, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71(1993)
3802.
[65] Aydemir, A.Y., Nonlinear studies of m=1m o d e s
in high-temperature plasmas, Phys. Fluids B 4
(1992) 3469.
[66] Zakharov, L.E., Rogers, B., Migliuolo, S., Phys.
Fluids B 5(1993) 2498.
[67] Kleva, R.G., Drake, J.F., Waelbroeck, F.L., Fast
reconnection in high temperature plasmas, Phys.
Plasmas 2(1995) 23.
[68] Aydemir, A.Y., Wiley, J.C., Ross, D.W., Toroidal
studies of sawtootrh oscillations in tokamaks,
Phys. Fluids B 1(1989) 774.
[69] Lichtenberg, A.J., Stochasticity as the mechanism
for the disruptive phase of the m=1t o k a m a k
oscillations, Nucl. Fusion 24(1984) 1277.
[70] Gimblett, C.G., Hastie, R.J., Calculation of the
post-crash state and 1-1/2 D simulation of saw-
tooth cycles, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 36
(1994) 1439.
[71] Voitsekhovitch, I., Litaudon, X., Moreau, D.,
Aniel, T., B ecoulet, A., Ebra, M., Jorin, E.,
Kazarian-Vibert, F., Peysson, Y., Thermal elec-
tron transport in regimes with low and negative
magnetic shear in Tore-Supra, Nucl. Fusion 37
(1997) 1715.[72] Bhatnagar, V.P., Start, D.F.H., Jacquinot, J.,
Chaland, F., Cherubini, A., Porcelli, F., Local
magnetic shear control in a tokamak via fast waveminority ion current drive: theory and experiments
in JET, Nucl. Fusion 34(1994) 1579.
[73] Perkins, F.W., Harvey, R.W., Makowski, M.,
Rosenbluth, M.N., Prospects for electron cyclotron
current drive stabilzation of neoclassical tearing
modes in ITER, in Controlled Fusion and PlasmaPhysics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur. Conf. Berchtesgar-
den, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part III, European Physical
Society, Geneva (1997) 1017{1020.
[74] Mercier, C., A necessary condition for hydromag-
netic stability of plasma with axial symmetry,Nucl. Fusion 1(1960) 47.
[75] Porcelli, F., Rosenbluth, M.N., Modied Mercier
criterion, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40(1998)
481.
[76] Chang, Z., Callen, J.D., Frederickson, E.D., Bud-
ny, R.V., Hegna, C.C., McGuire, K.M., Zarnstor,M.C., TFTR Group, Observation of nonlinear neo-
classical pressure-gradient-driven tearing modes in
TFTR, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74(1995) 4663.
[77] Gates, D.A., Edwards, A.M., Hender, T.C., Lloyd,
B., Morris, A.W., O’Brien, M., Robinson, D.C.,
Valovic, M., Warrick, C.D., Whitehurst, G.A., Wil-son, H., COMPASS-D and RF Heating Teams,
The eect of current prole control on the -
limit in the COMPASS-D tokamak, in ControlledFusion and Plasma Physics 1995 (Proc. 22nd Eur.
Conf. Bournemouth, 1995), Vol. 19C, Part IV,
European Physical Society, Geneva (1995) 117{120.
[78] La Haye, R.J., Lao, L.L., Strait, E.J., Taylor, T.S.,
High beta tokamak operation in DIII-D limitedat low density/collisionality by resistive tearing
modes, Nucl. Fusion 37(1997) 397.
[79] Zohm, H., Maraschek, M., Pautasso, G., Schit-
tenhelm, M., Sesnic, S., Sokoll, M., Suttrop, W.,
Alexander, M., Bessenrodt-Weberpals, M., Boozer,A., de Blank, H.J., Fuchs, J.C., Gernhardt, J.,
Gruber, O., Kass, T., Kaufmann, M., Lang, P.T.,
Lachner, K., Meister, H., Mertens, V., Neu, R.,W¨olﬂ, F., ASDEX Upgrade Team, ECRH Team,
ICRH Team, NBI Team, MHD stability and dis-
ruption physics in ASDEX-Upgrade, Plasma Phys.Control. Fusion 37(1995) A313.
[80] Gates, D.A., Lloyd, B., Morris, A.W., McArdle,
G., O’Brien, M.R., Valovic, M., Warrick, C.D.,Wilson, H.R., COMPASS-D Team, ECRH Team,
Neoclassical islands on COMPASS-D, Nucl. Fusion
37(1997) 1593.
[81] Zohm, H., Gates, D.A., Wilson, H.R., Ganten-
bein, G., Gruber, O., G¨ unter, S., Maraschek, M.,
Morris, A.W., Sokoll, M., Wagner, D., ASDEX-Upgrade Team, COMPASS-D Team, Neoclassi-
2376 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 128 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
cal MHD in ASDEX-Upgrade and COMPASS-D,
Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 39(1997) B237.
[82] Huysmans, G., Neoclassical tearing modes in JET,
paper presented at the 8th ITER Disruption,
Plasma Control and MHD Expert Group Meeting,
San Diego, 1998.
[83] Ozeki, T., Preliminary investigation of neoclassical
tearing modes in JT-60U, paper presented at the
8th ITER Disruption, Plasma Control and MHDExpert Group Meeting, San Diego, 1998.
[84] Callen, J.D., Qu, W.X., Siebert, K.D., Car-
reras, B.A., Shaing, K.C., Spong, D.A., Neoclas-
sical MHD equations, instabilities and transport
in tokamaks, in Plasma Physics and ControlledNuclear Fusion Research 1986 (Proc. 11th Int.
Conf. Kyoto, 1987), Vol. 2, IAEA, Vienna (1987)
157{166.
[85] Carrera, R., Hazeltine, R.D., Kotschenreuther, M.,
Island bootstrap current modication of the non-
linear dynamics of the tearing mode, Phys. Fluids29(1986) 899.
[86] Smolyakov, A.J., Hirose, A., Lazzaro, E., Re, G.B.,
Callen, J.D., Rotating nonlinear islands in a toka-mak plasma, Phys. Plasmas 2(1995) 1581.
[87] Wilson, H.R., Connor, J.W., Hastie, R.J., Hegna,
C.C., Threshold for neoclassical islands in a lowcollision frequency tokamak, Phys. Plasmas 3
(1996) 248.
[88] Fitzpatrick, R., Helical temperature perturbations
associated with tearing modes in tokamak plasmas,
Phys. Plasmas 2(1995) 825.
[89] Gianakon, T.A., Hegna, C.C., Callen, J.D., Com-
putational modeling of neoclassical and resistive
magnetohydromagnetic tearing modes in toka-
maks, Phys. Plasmas 3(1996) 4637.
[90] JET Team (presented by G.T.A. Huysmans), La
Haye, R., Wilson, H.R., Observation of neoclas-
sical tearing modes in JET, IIAEA-F1-CN-69
EXP3/03, presented at the 1998 IAEA Fusion
Energy Conference.
[91] Waelbroek, F.L., Fitzpatrick, R., Rotation and
locking of magnetic islands, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78
(1997) 1703.
[92] Chang, Z., Frederickson, E.D., Callen, J.D.,
McGuire, K.M., Bell, M.G., Budny, R.V., Bush,
C.E., Darrow, D.S., Janos, A.C., Johnson,L.C., Park, H.K., Scott, S.D., Strachan, J.D.,
Synakowski, E.J., Taylor, G., Wieland, R.M.,
Zarnstor, M.C., Zweben, S.J., TFTR Team,Transport eects of low ( m;n)M H Dm o d e so n
TFTR supershots, Nucl. Fusion 34(1994) 1309.
[93] Chang, Z., Callen, J.D., Global energy conne-
ment degradation due to macroscopic phenomena
in tokamaks, Nucl. Fusion 30(1990) 219.
[94] Hegna, C.C., Callen, J.D., On the stabilization of
neoclassical magnetodynamic tearing modes usinglocalized current drive or heating, Phys. Plasmas
4(1997) 2940.
[95] Weening, R.H., Bondeson, A., Comments Plasma
Phys. 15(1992) 77. Bondeson, A., in Controlled
Fusion and Plasma Physics 1993 (Proc. 20th EPS
Conf. Lisbon, 1993), Vol. 17C, Part IV, EuropeanPhysical Society, Geneva (1993) 1339.
[96] Kessel, C., Manickam, J., Rewoldt, G., Tang,
W.M., Improved plasma performance in tokamakswith negative magnetic shear, Phys. Rev. Lett.
72(1994) 1212. Manickam, J., Chance, M.S.,
Jardin, S.C., Kessel, C., Monticello, D., Pom-
phrey, N., Reiman, A., Wang, C., Zakharov, L.E.,
The prospects for magnetohydrodynamic stabilityin advanced tokamak regimes, Phys. Plasmas 1
(1994) 1601.
[97] Prsch, D., Tasso, H., A theorem on MHD-
instability of plasmas with resistive walls, Nucl.
Fusion 11(1971) 259.
[98] Jensen, T.H., Chu, M.S., J. Plasma Phys. 30
(1983) 57.
[99] Gimblett, C.G., On free boundary instabilities
induced by a resistive wall, Nucl. Fusion 26(1986)
617.
[100] Bondeson, A., Persson, M., Stabilization by resis-
tive walls and q-limit disruptions in tokamaks,
Nucl. Fusion 28(1988) 1887.
[101] Zakharov, L.E., Putvinskii, S.V., Sov. J. Plasma
Phys. 13(1987) 68.
[102] Strait, E.J., et al., in Plasma Physics and Con-
trolled Nuclear Fusion Research 1988 (Proc. 12th
Int. Conf. Nice, 1989), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1989)83.
[103] Strait, E.J., Taylor, T.S., Turnbull, A.D., Ferron,
J . R . ,L a o ,L . L . ,R i c e ,B . ,S a u t e r ,O . ,T h o m p s o n ,S.J., Wr oblewski, D., Wall stabilization of high-
beta tokamak discharges in DIII-D, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 74(1995) 2483.
[104] Garofalo, A.M., Turnbull, A.D., Austin, M.E.,
Bialek, J., Chu, M.S., Comer, K.J., Fredrick-son, E.D., Groebner, R.J., Lao, L.L., Lazarus,
E.A., Navratil, G.A., Osborne, T.H., Rice, B.W.,
Sabbagh, S.A., Scoville, J.T., Strait, E.J., Tay-lor, T.S., Direct observation of the resistive wall
mode in a tokamak and its interaction with
plasma rotation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82(1999) 3811{
3814.
[105] Chu, M.S., Greene, J.M., Jensen, T.H., Miller,
R.L., Bondeson, A., Johnson, R.W., Mauel, M.E.,Eect of toroidal plasma ﬂow and ﬂow shear on
global magnetohydrodynamic MHD modes, Phys.
Plasmas 2(1995) 2236.
[106] Okabayashi, M., et al., in Plasma Physics and Con-
trolled Nuclear Fusion Research 1988 (Proc. 12th
Int. Conf. Nice, 1989), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1989)97.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2377

--- Page 129 ---

ITER Physics Basis
[107] Okabayashi, M., Pomphrey, N., Manickam, J.,
Ward, D.J., Bell, R.E., Hatcher, R.E., Kaita, R.,
Kaye, S.M., Kugel, H.W., Leblanc, B., Levin-ton, F.M., Roberts, D.W., Sesnic, S., Sun, Y.,
Takakashi, H., Role of the stabilizing shell in high-
,l o w -qdisruptions in PBX-M, Nucl. Fusion 36
(1996) 1167.
[108] Bondeson, A., Ward, D.J., Stabilization of external
modes in tokamaks by resistive walls and plasmarotation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72(1994) 2709.
[109] Ward, D.J., Bondeson, A., Stabilization of ideal
modes by resistive walls in tokamaks with plasma
rotation and its eect on the beta limit, Phys. Plas-
mas 2(1995) 1570.
[110] Ward, D.J., The eect of partial poloidal wall sec-
tions on the wall stabilization of external kink
modes, Phys. Plasmas 3(1996) 3653.
[111] Betti, R., Freidberg, J.P., Stability, analysis of
resistive wall kink modes in rotating plasmas,
P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 74(1995) 2949.
[112] Pomphrey, N., Jardin, S.C., Bialek, J., Chance,
M.S., d’Ippolito, D.A., Finn, J.M., Fitzpatrick, R.,
Johnso, J.L., Kessel, C.E., Manickam, J., Mon-ticello, D.A., Myra, J.R., Ono, M., Park, W.,
Reiman, H.A., Rewoldt, G., Tang, W.M., Valeo,
E.J., Zakharov, L.E., MHD regimes and feedbackstabilization in advanced tokamaks, in Plasma
Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research
1994 (Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Seville, 1994), Vol. 3,IAEA, Vienna (1995) 251{260.
[113] Fitzpatrick, R., Aydemir, A.Y., Stabilization of the
resistive shell mode in tokamaks, Nucl. Fusion 36
(1996) 11.
[114] Mikhailovskii, A.B., Kuvshinov, B.N., Plasma
Phys. Rep. 21(1995) 802. (Fizika Plazmy 21
(1995) 849.)
[115] Bondeson, A., Chu, M.S., Inertia and ion Landau
damping of low-frequency magnetohydrodynami-
cal modes in tokamaks, Phys. Plasmas 3(1996)
3013.
[116] Finn, J.M., Stabilization of ideal plasma resistive
wall modes in cylindrical geometry: the eect of
resistive layers, Phys. Plasmas 2(1995) 3782.
[117] Bondeson, A., Xie, H.X., Stability of ideal and
resistive modes in cylindrical plasmas with resis-
tive walls and plasma rotation, Phys. Plasmas 4
(1997) 2081.
[118] Fitzpatrick, R., Jensen, T.H., Stabilization of the
resistive wall mode using a fake rotating shell,Phys. Plasmas 3(1996) 2641.
[119] Bishop, C.M., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 31
(1989) 1179.
[120] Jensen, T.H., Fitzpatrick, R., Resistive wall feed-
back stabilization, Phys. Plasmas 4(1997) 2997.
[121] Jensen, T.H., A study of the eciency of ‘intelli-
gent shells’, Phys. Plasmas 5(1998) 192.[122] Nave, M.F.F., Wesson, J.A., Mode locking in toka-
maks, Nucl. Fusion 30 (1990) 2575.
[123] Zohm, H., et al., Europhys. Lett. 11(1990) 745.
[124] Gates, D.G., Hender, T.C., Resistive wall induced
forbidden bands of mode rotation frequency on
the COMPASS-D tokamak, Nucl. Fusion 36(1996)
273.
[125] Snipes, J.A., Campbell, D.J., Haynes, P.S., Hen-
der, T.C., Hugon, M., Lomas, P.J., Lopes Cardozo,N.J., Nave, M.F.F., Sch¨ uller, F.C., Large ampli-
tude quasi-stationary MHD modes in JET, Nucl.
Fusion 28(1988) 1085.
[126] Hender, T.C., Fitzpatrick, R., Morris, A.W., Car-
olan, P.G., Durst, R.D., Eddlington, T., Ferreira,J., Fielding, S.J., Haynes, P.S., Hugill, J., Jenk-
ins, I.J., La Haye, R.J., Parham, B.J., Robinson,
D.C., Todd, T.N., Valovic, M., Vayakis, G., Eectof resonant magnetic perturbations on COMPASS-
C tokamak discharges, Nucl. Fusion 32(1992)
2091.
[127] Scoville, J.T., La Haye, R.J., Kellman, A.G.,
Osborne, T.H., Stambaugh, R.D., Strait, E.J.,
Taylor, T.S., Locked modes in DIII-D and amethod for prevention of the low density mode,
Nucl. Fusion 31(1991) 875.
[128] Fishpool, G.M., Haynes, P.S., Error eld instabil-
ities in JET, Nucl. Fusion 34(1994) 109.
[129] Roberts, D.E., Sherwell, D., Flectcher, J.D., Noth-
nagel, G., de Villiers, J.A.M., Major disruptionsinduced by helical coils on the tokoloshe tokamak,
Nucl. Fusion 31(1991) 319.
[130] Yoshino, R., Neyatani, Y., Isei, N., Koide, Y.,
Kawano, Y., Tanga, A., Campbell, D.J., Johnson,
M.F., Rossi, L., Disruption amelioration experi-
ments in JT-60U and JET, in Plasma Physics andControlled Nuclear Fusion Research 1994 (Proc.
15th Int. Conf. Seville, 1994), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna
(1995) 685{695.
[131] Fitzpatrick, R., Hender, T.C., The interaction
of resonant magnetic perturbations with rotatingplasmas, Phys. Fluids B 3(1991) 644.
[132] de Bendetti, M., Buttery, R.J., Gates, D., Hender,
T.C., Lazzaro, E., Leahy, P., Morris, A.W., Rimini,F., Santagiustina, A., Tubbing, B., Plasma inter-
action with error elds on JET and COMPASS-D,
to be published in Controlled Fusion and PlasmaPhysics 1998 (Proc. 25th Eur. Conf. Prague, 1998),
European Physical Society, Geneva (1998).
[133] Jensen, T.H., Leonard, A.W., La Haye, R.J., Chu,
M.S., Eects of plasma ﬂow on error eld islands,
Phys. Fluids B 3(1991) 1650.
[134] Fitzpatrick, R., Interaction of tearing modes with
external structures in cylindrical geometry, Nucl.
Fusion 33(1993) 1049.
[135] Fitzpatrick, R., Hender, T.C., Eect of a static
external magnetic perturbation on resistive mode
2378 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 130 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
stability in tokamaks, Phys. Plasmas 1(1994)
3337.
[136] La Haye, R.J., Scoville, J.T., A method to measure
poloidal eld coil irregularities in toroidal plasma
devices, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 62(1991) 2146.
[137] Connor, J.W., Taylor, J.B., Scaling laws for plasma
connement, Nucl. Fusion 17(1977) 1047.
[138] La Haye, R.J., Hyatt, A.W., Scoville, J.T., Non-
linear instability to low m;n= 1 error elds in
DIII-D as a function of plasma ﬂuid rotation and
beta, Nucl. Fusion 32(1992) 2119.
[139] Crossland, R.T., Hayward, R.J., Todd, T.N.,
Haynes, P.S., Hill, J.W., Morris, A.W., Nicholson,
P . ,C r o o k ,R . A . ,C O M P A S ST Fc o i ld y n a m i cv e r -tical preload device and PF coil alignment using a
xed coil array, in Fusion Technology 1990 (Proc.
16th Symp. London, 1990), Vol. 1, PergammonPress, Oxford (1991) 632{635.
[140] Buttery, R.J., Campbell, D.J., de Benedetti,
M . ,G a t e s ,D . ,H e n d e r ,T . C . ,L e a h y ,P . ,M o r -ris, A.W., Santaguistina, A., Tubbing, B., JET
Team, COMPASS-D Team, Error eld thresh-
olds, harmonics and scaling studies on JET andCOMPASS-D and implications for ITER, in Con-
trolled Fusion and Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc.
24th Eur. Conf. Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A,Part I, European Physical Society, Geneva (1997)
265{269.
[141] Carolan, P.G., Edwards, A.M., Fitzpatrick, R.,
Gimblett, C.G., Hender, T.C., Morris, A.W.,
O’Connell, R., Scanlan, J.V., Correction of error
eld locked modes in COMPASS-D, in ControlledFusion and Plasma Physics 1994 (Proc. 24th Eur.
Conf. Montpellier, 1994), Vol. 18B, Part I, Euro-
pean Physical Society, Geneva (1994) 214{127.
[142] La Haye, R.J., Physics of Locked Modes in ITER,
Error Field Limits, Rotation for Obviation and
Measurement of Field Errors, General Atomics
Rep. GA-A22468 (1997).
[143] Santagiustina, A., Ali Arshad, S., Campbell, D.J.,
D‘Antona, G., de Benedetti, M., Edwards, A.M.,
Fishpool, G., Lazzaro, E., La Haye, R.J., Morris,
A.J., ¨Ostr¨om, R., Rossi, L., Sartori, F., Savrukhin,
P., Tabellini, M., Tubbing, B.J., Tanga, A., Zullo,
G., Studies of tearing mode control in JET, in
Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics 1995 (Proc.22nd Eur. Conf. Bournemouth, 1995), Vol. 19C,
Part IV, European Physical Society, Geneva (1995)
461{464.
[144] Wagner, F., Becker, G., Behringer, K., et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 49(1982) 1408.
[145] Nave, M.F.F., Smeulders, P., Hender, T.C., Lomas,
P.J., Alper, B., Bak, P., Balet, B., Christiansen,
J.P., Clement, S., de Esch, H.P.L., Hawkes, N.,
Huysmans, G.T.A., Jones, T.T.C., K¨ oing, R., Law-
son, K., Linertat, J., Maas, A., Marcus, F.B.,O’Brien, D.P., Rookes, A., Sartori, R., Stamp,
M.F., Schunke, B., Thomas, P.R., Thomsen, K.,
An overview of MHD activity at the terminationof JET hot ion modes, Nucl. Fusion 37(1997) 809.
[146] Nave, M.F.F., Huysmans, G.T.A., Balet, B., de
Esch, B., Gianella, R., Gowers, C., Jones, T.,Konig, R., Lomas, P., Parail, V.V., Rimini, F.,
Schunke, B., Thomas, P., Discharge optimisation
and the control of MHD modes, in ControlledFusion and Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur.
Conf. Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part I,
European Physical Society, Geneva (1997) 1{4.
[147] Suttrop, W., et al., in Controlled Fusion and
Plasma Physics 1996 (Proc. 23rd Eur. Conf. Kiev,1996), Vol. I, European Physical Society, Geneva
(1996) 47.
[148] Kass, T., G¨ unter, S., Maraschek, M., Suttrop,
W., Zohm, H., ASDEX-Upgrade Team, Charac-
teristics of type I and type III ELM precur-
sors in ASDEX-Upgrade, in Controlled Fusionand Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur. Conf.
Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part IV, Euro-
pean Physical Society, Geneva (1997) 1521{1524.
[149] Kamada, Y., Ushigusa, K., Naito, O., Neyatani,
Y., Ishida, S., Fujita, T., Yoshino, R., Kikuchi, M.,
Mori, M., Ninomiya, H., ELMy H-mode with high-
Nand high-pin JT-60U, Plasma Phys. Control.
Fusion 36(1994) A123.
[150] Zohm, H., Osborne, T.H., Burrell, K.H., Chu,
M.S., Doyle, E.J., Gohil, P., Hill, D.N., Lao, L.L.,
Leonard, A.W., Taylor, T.S., Turnbull, A.D., ELM
studies on DIII-D and a comparison with ASDEXresults, Nucl. Fusion 35(1995) 543.
[151] Osborne, T.H., Groebner, R.J., Lao, L.L.,
Leonard, A.W., Maingi, R., Miller, R.L., Porter,G.D., Thomas, D.M., Waltz, R.E., Scaling of
ELM and H-mode pedestal characteristics in ITER
shaped discharges in the DIII-D tokamak, in Con-
trolled Fusion and Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc.
24th Eur. Conf. Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A,Part III, European Physical Society, Geneva (1997)
1101{1104.
[152] Miller, R.L., Lin-Liu, Y.R., Osborne, T.H., Taylor,
T.S., Ballooning mode stability for self-consistent
pressure and current proles at the H-mode edge,
in Proc. 6th IAEA Technical Committee Meetingon H-mode Physics, Kloster Seeon, 1997, Plasma
Phys. Control. Fusion 40(1998) 753.
[153] JET Team (presented by M. Keilhacker), Latest
JET results in deuterium and deuterium{tritium
plasmas, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 39(1997)
B1.
[154] Snipes, J.A., Granetz, R.S., Greenwald, M., Hub-
bard, A.E., Hutchinson, I.H., Irby, J., Kesner, J.,
Migluolo, S., Sunn Pederson, T., Ramos, J., Rice,J., Stek, P.C., Takase, Y., Wolfe, S.M., ELMs and
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2379

--- Page 131 ---

ITER Physics Basis
fast edge ﬂuctuations in Alcator C-Mod, in Proc.
of 6th IAEA Technical Committee Meeting on H-
mode Physics, Kloster Seeon, 1997, Plasma Phys.Control. Fusion 40(1998) 765.
[155] Weisen, H., Dutch, M.J., Hofmann, F., Martin, Y.,
Moret, J.-M., Nieswand, C., Pietrzyk, Z.A., Pitts,R.A., Pochelon, A., Eect on connement of edge-
localized-modes in TCV, Plasma Phys. Control.
Fusion 38(1996) 1415.
[156] Fielding, S.J., Ashall, J.D., Carolan, P.G., Colton,
A., Gates, D., Hugill, J., Morris, A. W., Val-
ovic, M., COMPASS-D Team, ECRH Team, The
H-mode in COMPASS-D, Plasma Phys. Control.
Fusion 381091.
[157] Kaye, S.M., Dunlop, J.L., Hahm, T.S., Sesnic,
S., Tang, W., Harris, J.H., Roney, P., Davis,
W., ELM-related ﬂuctuations in PBX-M H-modes,Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 36(1994) A135.
[158] Kerner, W., Pogutse, O., van der Linden, R., Ideal
interchange instability near the separatrix in theSOL and its relation to ELMs, Plasma Phys. Con-
trol. Fusion 39(1997) 757.
[159] JET Team (presented by G.C. Vlases), Eect of
divertor conguration on plasma performance in
JET, in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf.
Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1997) 371{383.
[160] Suttrop, W., Gehre, O., Fuchs, J.C., Reimerdes,
H., Schneider, W., Schweiner, J., ASDEX-UpgradeTeam, Eects of type-I edge-localised modes on
transport in ASDEX-Upgrade, in Proc. 6th IAEA
Technical Committee Meeting on H-mode Physics,Kloster Seeon, 1997, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion
40(1998) 771.
[161] Sugihara, M., ITER Joint Central Team, Garch-
ing, Germany, presentation to the ITER Divertor
Database Expert Group Meeting, personal com-
munication, March 1997.
[162] Gauthier, E., Chankin, A., Clement, S., Coad, P.,
Davies, S., Fishpool, G., Lingertat, J., Mattews,G., ELM dynamics and power deposition in the
JET divertor, in Controlled Fusion and Plasma
Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur. Conf. Berchtesgar-den, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part I, European Physical
Society, Geneva (1997) 61{64.
[163] Janos, A., Hastie, J., Mcguire, K., Frederickson,
E., Bursts of electron cyclotron emission during
ELMs and high disruptions in TFTR, Plasma
Phys. Control. Fusion 38(1996) 1373.
[164] Nagashima, K., Shoji, T., Miura, Y., Investigation
of edge localized modes in the JFT-2M tokamak,
Nucl. Fusion 36(1996) 335.
[165] Buttery, R.J., Gates, D.A., Colton, A., de Blank,
H., Fielding, S.J., Hender, T.C., Morris, A.W.,
Maraschek, M., Schittenhelm, M., Suttrop, W.,Valovic, M., ELM related MHD activity on theCOMPASS-D tokamak compared with ASDEX-
Upgrade, in Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics
1995 (Proc. 22nd Eur. Conf. Bournemouth, 1995),Vol. 19C, Part III, European Physical Society,
Geneva (1995) 273{277.
[166] Ali Arshad, S., Campbell, D., Colton, A., Crip-
well, P., de Kock, L., Kramer, G.J., Nave, M.F.F.,
Neill, G.F., ELM precursors in JET, in Controlled
Fusion and Plasma Physics 1992 (Proc. 19th Eur.Conf. Innsbruck, 1992), Vol. 16C, Part I, European
Physical Society, Geneva (1992) 227{230.
[167] Gill, R.D., et al., in Controlled Fusion and Plasma
Physics 1996 (Proc. 23rd Eur. Conf. Kiev, 1996),
Vol. 1, European Physical Society, Geneva (1996)167. Nave, M.F.F., Alper, B., Smeulders, P., Ali
Arshad, S., et al., Observations of MHD activity in
JET high-performance plasmas, in Proc. Int. Conf.on Plasma Physics, Foz Do Iguacu Brazil, 1994,
AIP Conf. Proc. 345(1995) 58{65.
[168] Colton, A.L., Buttery, R.J., Fielding, S.J., Gates,
D.A., Hender, T.C., Hugill, J., Morris, A.W., Val-
ovic, M., COMPASS-D Team, ECRH Team, ELM
studies in the COMPASS-D tokamak, PlasmaPhys. Control. Fusion 38(1996) 1359.
[169] Valovic, M., Edwards, M., Gates, D., Fielding,
S.J., Hender, T.C., Hugill, J., Morris, A.W.,COMPASS-D Team, L{H transitions and ELMs
on COMPASS-D, in Controlled Fusion and Plasma
Physics 1994 (Proc. 21st Eur. Conf. Montpellier,1994), Vol. 18B, Part I, European Physical Soci-
ety, Geneva (1994) 318{321.
[170] Reimerdes, H., Pochelon, A., Suttrop, W., Gui-
ttienne, P.H., Weisen, H., Toroidally asymmetric
ELM precursor oscillations in the TCV tokamak,
in Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics 1997(Proc. 24th Eur. Conf. Berchtesgarden, 1997),
Vol. 21A, Part II, European Physical Society,
Geneva (1997) 533{537.
[171] Hirsch, M., Holzhauer, E., Baldzuhn, J., Brake,
R., Fiedler, S., Geist, T., Grigull, P., Hart-fu, H.J., Hofmann, J., Jaenicke, R., Koponen,
J., Wagner, F., Weller, A., Wobrig, H., W7-AS
Team, Dynamic behaviour of the H-mode trans-port barrier in W7-AS stellarator, in Controlled
Fusion and Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur.
Conf. Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part III,European Physical Society, Geneva (1997) 1601{
1604.
[172] Connor, J.W., A review of models for ELMs,
Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40(1998) 191. Con-
ner, J.W., Edge-localised-modes { physics and
theory, in Proc. 6th IAEA Technical CommitteeMeeting on H-mode Physics, Kloster Seeon, 1997,
Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40(1998) 531.
[173] Manickam, J., The role of edge current density on
kink mode stability and its implication for mag-
2380 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 132 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
netohydrodynamic activity associated with edge
localized modes, Phys. Fluids B 4(1992) 1901.
[174] Huysmans, G.T.A., de Blank, H.J., Kerner, W.,
Goedbloed, J.P., Nave, M.F.F., MHD stability
modes of edge localized modes in JET discharges,
in Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics 1992(Proc. 19th Eur. Conf. Innsbruck, 1992), Vol. 16C,
Part I, European Physical Society, Geneva (1992)
247{251.
[175] Connor, J.W., Hastie, R.J., Wilson, H.R., Miller,
R.L., Magnetodynamic stability of tokamak edge
plasmas, Phys. Plasms 5(1998) 2687. Connor,
J.W., Wilson, H.R., in Theory of Fusion Plas-
mas (ed. J.W. Connor, E. Sindoni, J. Vaclavik),Editrice Compositori, Bologna (1997) 441.
[176] Pogutse, O., Cordey, J.G., Kerner, W., Schunke,
B., Edge modes as ELM events, in ControlledFusion and Plasma Physics 1995 (Proc. 22nd Eur.
Conf. Bournemouth, 1995), Vol. 19C, Part III,
European Physical Society, Geneva (1995) 277{280.
[177] ASDEX Team, The H-mode of ASDEX, Nucl.
Fusion 29(1989) 1959.
[178] Huysmans, G.T.A., Challis, C.D., Erba, M.,
Kerner, W., Parail, V.V., Inﬂuence of edge cur-
rents and pressure gradients on the MHD stabil-ity of low-nexternal kink modes, in Controlled
Fusion and Plasma Physics 1995 (Proc. 24th Eur.
Conf. Bournemouth, 1995), Vol. 19C, Part I,European Physical Society, Geneva (1995) 201{
204.
[179] Lau, Y.-T., A linear analysis for edge-localized
mode precursors, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 38
(1996) 1393.
[180] Itoh, S.-I., Itoh, K., Fukuyama, A., Miura, Y.,
JFT-2M Group, Edge localized mode activity as
a limit cycle in tokamak plasmas, Phys. Rev. Lett.
67(1991) 2485.
[181] Zohm, H., ASDEX-Upgrade Team, NI and ICRH
Group, Dynamic behavior of the L{H transition,P h y s .R e v .L e t t 72(1994) 222.
[182] Vojtsekhovich, I.A., Dnestrovskij, A.Yu., Parail,
V.V., Self-consistent description of L{H modetransition dynamics in tokamaks, Nucl. Fusion 35
(1995) 631.
[183] Lebedev, V.B., Diamond, P.H., Gruzinova, I.,
Carreras, B.A., A minimal dynamical model of
edge localized mode phenomena, Phys. Plasmas 2
(1995) 3345.
[184] Itoh, S.-I., Itoh, K., Fukuyama, A., Yagi, M., Edge
localized modes as new bifurcations in tokamaks,
P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 76(1996) 920.
[185] Itoh, S.-I., Toda, S., Yagi, M., Itoh, K., Fukuyama,
A., Physics of collapses: probabilistic occurrence of
ELMs and crashes, in Proc. of 6th IAEA TechnicalCommittee Meeting on H-mode Physics, KlosterSeeon, 1997, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40
(1998) 737.
[186] Pogutse, O., Kerner, W., Gribkov, V., Bazdenkov,
S., Osipenko, M., The resistive interchange convec-
tion in the edge of tokamak plasmas, Plasma Phys.
Control. Fusion 36(1994) 1963.
[187] Horton, W., Hu, G., Laval, G., Turbulent trans-
port in mixed states of convective cells and sheared
ﬂows, Phys. Plasmas 3(1996) 2912.
[188] Taylor, T.S., Physics of advanced tokamaks,
Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 39(1997) B47{B73.
[189] Boucher, D., Baranov, Y., Fischer, B., Litaudon,
X . ,M o r e a u ,D . ,N e v i n s ,W . M . ,P a r a i l ,V . ,S ¨ oldner,
F . X . ,V o i t s e k h o v i t c h ,I . ,I T E RJ o i n tC e n t r a lT e a m ,ITER Home Teams, ITER scenarios including non-
inductive steady-state operation, in Fusion Energy
1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 2,IAEA, Vienna (1997) 945{952.
[190] Sabbagh, S.A., Gross, R.A., Mauel, M.E., Navratil,
G., Bell, M.G., Bitter, M., Bretz, N., Budny,R.V., Bush, C.E., Chance, M., Efthimion, P.,
Fredrickson, E.D., Hatcher, R., Hawryluk, R.J.,
Hirshman, S.P., Janos, A., Jardin, S., Jassby, D.,Manickam, J., Mccune, D., Mcguire, K.M., Med-
ley, S., Mueller, D., Nagayama, Y., Owens, D.K.,
Okabayashi, M., Park, H., Ramsey, A., Stratton,B., Synakowski, E., Taylor, G., Weiland, R., Zarn-
stor, M.C., Kesner, J., Marmar, E.S., Terry, J.L.,
High poloidal beta in the tokamak fusion test reac-tor limited by a natural inboard poloidal eld null,
Phys. Fluids B 3(1991) 2277.
[191] Mauel, M.E., Navratil, G.A., Sabbagh, S.A.,
Batha, S.H., Bell, M.G., Budny, R.V., Bush, C. E.,
Cavallo, A., Chance, M.S., Cheng, C.Z., Efthimion,
P.C., Fredereickson, E.D., Fu, G. Y., Hawryluk,R.J., Janos, A.C., Jassby, D.L., Levinton, F., Man-
ickam, J., Mccune, D.C., Mcguire, K.M., Medley,
S.S., Mikkelsen, D.R., Mueller, D., Nqagayama, Y.,
Owens, D.K., Park, H.K., Ramsey, A.T., Strat-
ton, B.C., Synakowski, E.J., Taylor, G., Wieland,R.M., Yamada, M., Zarnstor, M.C., Zweben, S.J.,
Achieving high fusion reactivity in high poloidal
beta discharges in TFTR, in Plasma Physics andControlled Nuclear Fusion Research 1994 (Proc.
14th Int. Conf. W¨ urzburg, 1992), Vol. 1, IAEA,
Vienna (1993) 205{218.
[192] Kamada, Y., Ushigusa, K., Neyatani, Y., Naito,O.,
Ozeki, T., Kawano, Y., Yoshino, R., Kubo, H.,
Fujita, T., Ishida, S., Sato, M., Koide, Y., Takeji,S., Sakurai, S., Tsuchiya, K., Manickam, J., Mat-
suoka, M., Kikuchi, M., Mori, M., Ninomiya, H.,
Azumi, M., JT-60U Team, Steady-state high per-formance in JT-60U, in Plasma Physics and Con-
trolled Nuclear Fusion Research 1994 (Proc. 15th
Int. Conf. Seville, 1994), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna(1995) 651{661.
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2381

--- Page 133 ---

ITER Physics Basis
[193] Ferron, J.R., Lao, L.L., Taylor, T.S., Kim, Y.A.,
Strait, E.J., Wroblewski, D., Improved conne-
ment and stability in the DIII-D tokamak obtainedthrough modication of the current prole, Phys.
Fluids B 5(1993) 2532.
[194] Hoang, G.T., Gil, C., Jorin, E., Moreau, D.,
Becoulet, A., Bibet, P., Bizarro, J.P., Bundy, R.V.,
Carrasco, J., Coulon, J.P., de Michelis, C., Dudok
de Wit, T., Monier-Garbet, P., Goniche, M., Guir-let, R., Hutter, T., Kaye, S.M., Lasalle, J., Lau-
rent, L., Lecoustey, P., Litaudon, X., Mattioli, M.,
P e y s s o n ,Y . ,P e c q u e t ,A . - L . ,R e y ,G . ,S a b b a g h ,
S.A., Saoutic, B., Tonon, G., Vallet, J.C., Improved
connement in high l
ilower hybrid driven steady
state plasmas in Tore-Supra, Nucl. Fusion 34
(1994) 75.
[195] Litaudon, X., Arslanbekov, R., Hoang, G.T., Jof-
frin, E., Kazarian-Vibert, F., Moreau, D., Peysson,
Y., Bibet, P., Froissard, P., Goniche, M., Rey,
G., Ferron, J., Kupfer, K., Plasma Phys. Control.Fusion 38(1996) 1603.
[196] Ide, S., Naito, O., Fujita, T., Oikawa, T., Seki, M.,
JT-60 Team, Application of LHCD to sustainmentand control of a reversed magnetic shear plasma
in JT-60U, in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th
Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 3, IAEA, Vienna(1997) 253{264.
[197] Ide, S., Fujita, T., Naito, O., Seki, M., Sustainment
and modication of reversed magnetic shear byLHCD on JT-60U, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion,
38(1996) 1645.
[198] JET Team (presented by C. Gormezano), Optimi-
sation of JET plasmas with current prole control,
in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mon-
treal, 1996), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1997) 487{495.
[199] Levinton, F.M., Zarnstor, M.C., Batha, S.H.,
Bell, M., Bell, R.E., Budny, R.V., Bush, C.,
Chang, Z., Fredrickson, E.D., Janos, A., Man-
ickam, J., Ramsey, A., Sabbagh, S.A., Schmidt, G.
L., Synakowski, E.J., Taylor, G., Improved con-nement with reversed magnetic shear in TFTR,
P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 75(1995) 4417.
[200] Strait, E.J., Lao, L.L., Mauel, M.E., Rice, B.W.,
Taylor, T.S., Burrell, K.H., Chu, M.S., Lazarus,
E.A., Osborne, T.H., Thompson, S.J., Turnbull,
A.D., Enhanced connement and stability in DIII-D discharges with reversed magnetic shear, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 75(1995), 4421.
[201] Fujita, T., Ide, S., Shirai, H., Kukuchi, M., Naitio,
O., Koide, Y., Takeji, S., Kubo, H., Ishida, S.,
Internal transport barrier for electrons in JT-60U
reversed shear discharges, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78
(1997) 2377.
[202] Bell, M.G., Batha, S., Beer, M., Bell, R.E., Belov,
A . ,B e r k ,H . ,B e r n a b e i ,S . ,B i t t e r ,M . ,B r e i z -mann, B., Bretz, N.L., Budny, R., Bush, C.E.,Callen, J., Cauman, S., Chang, C.S., Chang, Z.,
Cheng, C.Z., Darrow, D.S., Dendy, R.O., Dor-
land, W., Doung, H., Efthimion, P.C., Ernst,D., Evenson, H., Fisch, N.J., Fisher, R., Fonck,
R.J., Fredereickson, E.D., Fu, G.Y., Furth, H.P.,
Gorelenkov, N.N., Goloborod’Ko, V.Ya., Grek,B., Grisham, L.R., Hammett, G.W., Hawryluk,
R.J., Heidbrink, W., Hermann, H.W., Herrmann,
M.C., Hill, K.W., Hoganm, J., Hooper, B., Hosea,J.C., Houlberg, W.A., Hughes, M., Jassby, D.L.,
Jobes, F.C., Johnson, D.W., Kaita, R., Kaye,
S., Kesner, J., Kim, J.S., Kissick, M., Krasil-
nikov, A.V., Kugel, H., Kumar, A., Lam, N.T.,
Lamarche, P., Leblanc, B., Levinton, F.M., Lude-s c h e r ,C . ,M a c h u z a k ,J . ,M a j e s k i ,R . P . ,M a n i c k a m ,
J . ,M a n s  e l d ,D . K . ,M a u e l ,M . ,M a z z u c a t o ,E . ,
Mcchesney, J., Mccune, D.C., Mckee, G., Mcguire,K.M., Meade, D.M., Medley, S.S., Mikkelsen, D.R.,
Mirnov, S.V., Mueller, D., Nagayama, Y., Navratil,
G.A., Nazikian, R., Okabayashi, M., Osakabe,M., Owens, D.K., Park, H.K., Park, W., Paul,
S.F., Petrov, M.P., Phillips, C.K., Phillips, M.,
Phillips, P., Ramsey, A.T., Rice, B., Redi, M.H.,Rewoldt, G., Reznik, S., Roquemore, A.L., Rogers,
J., Ruskov, E., Sabbagh, S.A., Sasao, M., Schilling,
G., Schmidt, G. L., Scott, S.D., Semenov, I.,Senko, T., Skinner, C.H., Stevenson, T., Strait,
E.J., Stratton, B.C., Strachan, J.D., Stodiek, W.,
Synakowski, E., Takahashi, H., Tang, W., Taylor,G., Thompson, M.E., Von Goeler, S., Von Halle,
A., Walters, R.T., Wang, S., White, R., Wieland,
R.M., Williams, M., Wislon, J.R., Wong, K.L.,Wurden, G.A., Yamada, M., Yavorski, V., Young,
K . M . ,Z a k h a r o v ,L . ,Z a r n s t o r  ,M . C . ,Z w e b e n ,
S.J., Deuterium{tritium plasmas in novel regimesin the tokamak fusion test reactor, Phys. Plasmas
4(1997) 1714.
[203] Lazarus, E.A., Chu, M.S., Ferron, J.R., Helton,
F.J., Hogan, J.T., Kellman, A.G., Lao, L.L., Lis-
ter, J.B., Osborne, T.H., Snider, R., Strait, E.J.,Taylor, T.S., Higher beta at higher elongation in
the DIII-D tokamak, Phys. Fluids B 3(1991) 2220.
[204] Sabbagh, S.A., Fredrickson, E.D., Manseld, D.K.,
Bell, M.G., Batha, S.H., Bell, R.E., Budny, R.V.,
Bush, C.E., Chang, Z., Hawryluk, R.J., Johnson,
D.W., Levinton, F.M., Manickam, J., Mcguire,K.M., Mueller, D., Paoletti, F., Park, H.K., Ram-
sey, A.T., Skinner, C.H., Synakowski, E.J., Taka-
hashi, H., Taylor, G., Zakharov, L.E., Zarnstor,M.C., Deuterium{tritium TFTR plasmas with
high-internal inductance, in Fusion Energy 1996
(Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1,IAEA, Vienna (1997) 921{930.
[205] Ozeki, T., Azumi, M., Tsunematsu, T., Tani, K.,
et al., Prole control for a stable high 
ptoka-
mak with a large bootstrap current, in Plasma
2382 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 134 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research
1992 (Proc. 14th Int. Conf. W¨ urzburg, 1992),
Vol. 2, IAEA, Vienna (1993) 187{194.
[206] Turnbull, A.D., Taylor, T.S., Lin-Liu, Y.R., St.
John, H., High beta and enhanced connement in
a second stable core VH-mode advanced tokamak,Phys Rev. Lett. 74(1995) 718.
[207] Lao, L.L., Burrell, K.H., Casper, T.S., Chan, V.S.,
Chu, M.S., Deboo, J.C., Doyle, E.J., Durst, R.D.,Forest, C.B., Greeneld, C.M., Groebner, R.J.,
Hinton, F.L., Kawano, Y., Lazarus, E.A., Lin-Liu,
Y.R., Mayel, M.E., Meyer, W.H., Miller, R.L.,
Navratil, G.A., Osborne, T.H., Peng, Q., Ret-
tig, C.L., Rewoldt, G., Rhodes, T.L., Rice, B.W.,Schissel, D.P., Stallard, B.W., Strait, E.J., Tang,
W.M., Taylor, T.S., Turnbull, A.D., Waltz, R.E.,
DIII-D Team, Rotational and magnetic shear sta-bilization of magnetohydrodynamic modes and
turbulence in DIII-D high performance discharges,
Phys. Plasmas 3(1996) 1953.
[208] Fredrickson, E.D., Sabbagh, S.A., Bell, M.G.,
Manseld, D., Batha, S., Chang, Z., Levinton, F.,
Mcguire, K.M., Okabayashi, M., Taylor, G., Taka-hasi, H., Hughes, M., Manickam, J., Phillips, M.,
Zakharov, L., The stability of advanced opera-
tional regimes on the tokamk fusion test reactor,Phys. Plasmas 4(1997) 1589.
[209] Manickam, J., Pomphrey, N., Todd, A.M.M., Ideal
MHD stability properties of pressure driven modesin low shear tokamaks, Nucl. Fusion 27(1987)
1461.
[210] Manickam, J., Fredrickson, E., Chang, Z.,
Okabayashi, M., Bell, M., Budny, R., Park,
W . ,S c h m i d t ,G . ,Z a r n s t o r  ,M . C . ,L e v i n t o n ,F . ,
Batha, S., Hender, T.C., Gimblett, C.G., Hastie,R.J., Phillips, M., Hughes, M.H., Sabbagh, S.A.,
MHD stability studies in reversed shear plasmas
in TFTR, in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th
Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna
(1997) 453{461.
[211] Strait, E.J., Casper, T.A., Chu, M.S., Ferron, J.R.,
Garofaro, A., Greeneld, C.M., La Haye, R.J., Lao,
L.L., Lazarus, E.A., Miller, R.L., Navratil, G.A.,Ren, C., Rice, B.W., Semenov, I., Sips, A.C.C.,
S¨oldner, F.X., Stallard, B.W., Taylor, T.S., Turn-
bull, A.D., DIII-D Team, Stability of negative cen-tral magnetic shear discharges in the DIII-D toka-
mak, Phys. Plasmas 4(1997) 1783.
[212] Park, W., Chang, Z., Fredrickson, E., Fu, G.Y.,
Pomphrey, N., Strauss, H.R., Sugiyama, L.E.,
in 3D simulation studies of tokamak plasmas
using MHD and extended-MHD models, in FusionEnergy 1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal,
1996), Vol. 2, IAEA, Vienna (1997) 411{422.
[213] Chang, Z., Nazikian, R., Fu, G.-Y., White,
R.B., Zweben, S.J., Frederickson, E.D., Batha,S.H., Bell, M.G., Bell, R.E., Budny, R.V.,
Bush, C.E., Chen, L., Cheng, C.Z., Darrow,
D., Leblanc, B., Levinton, F.M., Majeski, R.P.,Manseld, D.K., Mcguire, K.M., Park, H.K.,
Rewoldt, G., Synakowski, E.J., Tang, W.M., Tay-
lor, G., von Goeler, S., Wong, K.L., Zakharov,L., TFTR Group, Alpha-driven magnetohydrody-
namics (MHD) and MHD-induced alpha loss in
the tokamak fusion test reactor, Phys. Plasmas 4
(1997) 1610.
[214] Nazikian, R., Batha, S.H., Bell, M.G., Bell,
R.E., Budny, R.V., Bush, C.E., Chang, Z., Chen,
Y., Cheng, C.Z., Darrow, D.S., Duong, H.H.,
Efthimion, P.C., Frederickson, E.D., Fu, G.Y.,Gorelenkov, N.N., Leblance, B., Levinton, F.M.,
Majeski, R., Mazzucato, E., Medley, S.S., Park,
H.K., Petrov, M.P., Spong, D.A., Synakowski,E.J., Taylor, G., Von Goeler, S., White, R.B.,
Wong, K.L., Zweben, S.J., Observation of alpha
particle driven toroidal Alfv en eigenmodes in
TFTR DT plasmas, in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc.
16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1, IAEA,
Vienna (1997) 281{292.
[215] Kimura, H., Moriyama, S., Saigusa, M., Kusama,
Y., Ozeki, T., Kramer, G.J., Fujita, T., Oikawa, T.,
Fujii, T., Nemoto, M., Hamamatsu, K., Dacosta,O., Ishida, S., Kamada, Y., Kondoh, T., Morioka,
A., Neyatani, Y., Kobita, K., Afanassiev, V.I., JT-
60 Team, ICRF heating and TAE modes in reactor-relevant JT-60U discharges, in Fusion Energy 1996
(Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 3,
IAEA, Vienna (1997) 295{305.
[216] Takeji, S., et al., JAERI-Research Rep. 97-047, 10
(1997).
[217] Ishida, S., Takeji, S., Isayama, A., Isei, N., Ozeki,
T., Fujita, T., Kamada, Y., Neyetani, Y., Disrup-
tive beta limits for high performance discharges
in JT-60U, in Controlled Fusion and Plasma
Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur. Conf. Berchtesgar-
den, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part II, European PhysicalSociety, Geneva (1997) 489{492.
[218] Ozeki, T., Azumi, M., Ishii, Y., Kishimoto, Y.,
Fu, G.Y., Fujita, T., Rewoldt, G., Kikuchi, M.,Kamada, Y., Kimura, H., Kusama, Y., Saigusa,
M., Ide, S., Shirai, H., Physics issues of high boot-
strap current tokamaks, Plasma Phys. Control.Fusion 39(1997) A371.
[219] Lazarus, E.A., Navratil, G.A., Greeneld, C.M.,
Strait, E.J., Austin, M.E., Burrell, K.H., Casper,T.A., Baker, D.R., Deboo, J.C., Doyle, E.J., Durst,
R . ,F e r r o n ,J . R . ,F o r e s t ,C . B . ,G o h i l ,P . ,G r o e b -
ner, R.J., Heidbrink, W.W., Hong, R.-M., Houl-berg, W.A., Howard, A.W., Hsieh, C.-L., Hyatt,
A.W., Jackson, G.L., Kim, J., Lao, L.L., Las-
nier, C.J., Leonard, A.W., Lohr, J., La Haye,R.J., Maingi, R., Miller, R.L., Murakami, M.,
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2383

--- Page 135 ---

ITER Physics Basis
Osborne, T.H., Perkins, L.J., Petty, C.C., Rettig,
C . L . ,R h o d e s ,T . L . ,R i c e ,B . W . ,S a b b a g h ,S . A . ,
Schissel, D.P., Scoville, J.T., Snider, R.T., Stae-bler, G.M., Stallard, B.W., Stambaugh, R.D., St.
John, H.E., Stockdale, R.E., Taylor, P.L., Thomas,
D . M . ,T r u n b u l l ,A . D . ,W a d e ,M . R . ,W o o d ,R . ,Whyte, D., Higher fusion power gain with cur-
rent and pressure prole control in strongly shaped
DIII-D tokamak plasmas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77
(1996) 2714.
[220] Fujita, T., Ide, S., Kimura, H., Oikawa, T., Takeji,
S., Sharai, H., Ozeki, T., Kamada, Y., Ishida, S.,
JT-60 Team, Enhanced core connement in JT-
60U reversed shear discharges, in Fusion Energy1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1,
IAEA, Vienna (1997) 227{237.
[221] Greenwald, M., Terry, J.L., Wolfe, S.M., Ejima,
S., Bell, M.G., Kaye, S.M., Neilson, G.H., A new
look at density limits in tokamaks, Nucl. Fusion
28(1988) 2199.
[222] Mertens, V., Herrmann, A., Kallenbach, A., Kauf-
mann, M., Neuhauser, J., et al., Edge and diver-
tor physics in ASDEX-Upgrade with emphasis ondensity limit characteristics, Fusion Energy 1996
(Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1,
IAEA, Vienna (1997) 413.
[223] Murakami, M., Callen, J.D., Berry, L.A., Nucl.
Fusion 16(1976) 347.
[224] Fielding, S.J., Hugill, J., Mccracken, G.M., Paul,
J.W.M., Prentice, R., Stott, P.E., High-density dis-
charges with gettered torus walls in DITE, Nucl.
Fusion 17(1977) 1382.
[225] Gibson, A., Nucl. Fusion 16(1976) 546.
[226] Rebut, P.M., Green, B.J., Eect of impurity radi-
ation on tokamak equilibrium, in Plasma Physicsand Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research 1976
(Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Berchtesgarden, 1976), Vol. 2,
IAEA, Vienna (1977) 3.
[227] Ohyabu, N., Density limit in tokamaks, Nucl.
Fusion 19(1979) 1491.
[228] Ashbyd, E.T.F., Hughes, M.H., The thermal sta-
bility and equilibrium of peripheral plasma, Nucl.
Fusion 21(1981) 911.
[229] Campbell, D.J., Duperrex, P.A., Edwards, A.W.,
Gill, R.D., Gowers, C.W., et al., Sawteeth and
disruptions in JET, in Plasma Physics and Con-trolled Nuclear Fusion Research 1986 (Proc. 11th
Int. Conf. Kyoto, 1976), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna
(1987) 433.
[230] Wesson, J.A., Gill, R.D., Hugon, M., Sch¨ uller,
F.C., Snipes, J.A., Ward, D.J., Bartlett, D.V.,
Campbell, D.J., Duperrex, P.A., Edwards, A.W.,Granetz, R.S., Gottardi, N.A.O., Hender, T.C.,
Lazzaro, E., Lomas, P.J., Lopes Cardozo, N., Mast,
K.F., Nave, M.F.F., Salmon, N.A., Smeulders, P.,Thomas, P.R., Tubbing, B.J.D., Turner, M.F.,Weller, A., Disruptions in JET, Nucl. Fusion 29
(1989) 641.
[231] Lowry, C.G., Campbell, D.J., Gottardi, N., Law-
son, K., Vlases, G., Density limits in JET with
beryllium, in Controlled Fusion and Plasma Heat-
ing 1990 (Proc. 17th Eur. Conf. Amsterdam,1990), Vol. 14B, Part I, European Physical Soci-
ety, Geneva (1990) 339.
[232] St¨ abler, A., Niedemayer, H., Loch, R., et al., in
Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics 1989 (Proc.
16th Eur. Conf. Venice, 1989), Vol. 13B, Part I,
European Physical Society, Geneva (1989) 23.
[233] St¨ abler, A., Mccormick, K., Mertens, V., M¨ uller,
E.R., Neuhauser, J., et al., Density limit investiga-tions on ASDEX, Nucl. Fusion 32(1992) 1557.
[234] Kamada, Y., Hosogane, N., Yoshino, R., Hirayama,
T., Tsunematsu, T., Study of the density limitwith pellet fueling in JT-60, Nucl. Fusion 31(1991)
1827.
[235] Bell, M.G., Schmidt, L., Efthimion, P.C., Grek,
B., Hulse, R.A., et al., Attainment of high plasma
densities in TFTR with injection of multiple deu-
terium pellets, Nucl. Fusion 32(1992) 1585.
[236] Petrie, T.W., Kellman, A.G., Ali Mahdavi, M.,
Plasma density limits during ohmic, L-mode and
ELMing H-mode operation in DIII-D, Nucl. Fusion33(1993) 929.
[237] Keilhacker, M., JET Team, Overview of results
from the JET tokamak using a beryllium rst wall,Phys. Fluids B 2(1990) 1291.
[238] Messiaen, A.M., Ongena, J., Samm, U., Unter-
berg, B., van Wassenhove, G., et al., High conne-ment and high density with stationary plasma and
strong edge radiation in the TEXTOR-94 toka-
mak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77(1996) 2487.
[239] Lipschultz, B., Labombard, B., Marmar, E.S.,
Pickrell, M.M., Terry, J.L., Watterson, R., Wolfe,
S.M., Marfe: an edge plasma phenomenon, Nucl.
Fusion 24(1984) 977.
[240] Gruber, O., et al., IPP, Garching, Germany, Real-
time kinetic control of ASDEX-Upgrade plasmas,
presentation to the 6th Disruption, Plasma Con-
trol and MHD Expert Group Meeting, personalcommunication, March 1997.
[241] Stringer, T.E., A theory of Marfes, in Controlled
Fusion and Plasma Physics 1985 (Proc. 12th Eur.Conf. Budapest, 1985), Vol. 9F, Part I, European
Physical Society, Geneva (1985) 86.
[242] Neuhauser, J., Schneider, W., Wunderlich, R.,
Thermal instabilities and poloidal asymmetries in
the tokamak edge plasma, Nucl. Fusion 26(1986)
1679.
[243] Drake, J.F., Marfes: radiative condensation insta-
bility in tokamak edge plasma, Phys. Fluids 30
(1987) 2429.
[244] Choudhury, S.R., Kaw, P.K., Ionization and edge
2384 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 136 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
density gradient eects on MARFE instabilities in
tokamak plasmas, Phys. Fluids B 1(1989) 1646.
[245] Wesson, J.A., Hender, T.C., An extended treat-
ment of MARFE stability, Nucl. Fusion 33(1993)
1019.
[246] de Ploey, A., van der Linden, R.A.M., Huys-
mans, G.T.A., Goossens, M., Kerner, W., Goed-
bloed, J.P., Marfes: a magnetohydrodynamic sta-
bility study of two-dimensional tokamak equilibria,Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 39(1997) 423.
[247] Campbell, D.J., Clement, S., Gottardi, N., Gowers,
C., Harbour, P., et al., The density limit in JET
diverted plasmas, in Controlled Fusion and Plasma
Heating 1994 (Proc. 21st Eur. Conf. Montpellier,1994), Vol. 18B, Part I, European Physical Society,
Geneva (1994) 2.
[248] Lipschultz, B., Goetz, J., Labombard, B.,
Mccracken, G.M., Terry, J.L., et al., Dissipative
divertor operation in the Alcator C-Mod tokamak,
J. Nucl. Mater. 50(1995) 220.
[249] Asakura, N., Hosogane, N., Itami, K., Tsuji, S.,
Shimada, M., et al., Heat and particle trans-
port in the divertor and remote radiative cool-ing on JT-60U, in Plasma Physics and Controlled
Nuclear Fusion Research 1994 (Proc. 15th Int.
Conf. Seville, 1994), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1995)515.
[250] Allen, S.L., Bozek, A.S., Brooks, N.H., Buchen-
auer, D.A., Burrell, K.H., et al., Recent DIII-Ddivertor research, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 37
(1995) A191.
[251] Lackner, K., Chodura, R., Kaufmann, M.,
Neuhauser, J., Rauh, K.G., Schneider, W., Plasma
Phys. Control. Fusion 26(1984) 105.
[252] Borrass, K., Disruptive tokamak density limit
as a scrape-o layer/divertor phenomenon, Nucl.
Fusion 31(1991) 1035.
[253] Borrass, K., Schneider, R., Farengo, R., A scrape-
o layer based model for Hugill{Greenwald type
density limits, Nucl. Fusion 37(1997) 523.
[254] Campbell, D.J., Bickley, A., Chankin, A., Clement,
S., Davies, S.J., et al., Studies of reactor-relevant
H-mode regimes in the JET pumped divertor,Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 38(1996) 1497.
[255] Lang, P.T., B¨ uchl, K., Fuchs, J.C., Gehre, O., Gru-
ber, O., et al., Pellet refueling of ELMy H-modedischarges beyond the Greenwald limit in ASDEX-
Upgrade, in Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics
1995 (Proc. 22nd Eur. Conf. Bournemouth, 1995),Vol. 19C, Part II, European Physical Society,
Geneva (1995) 449.
[256] Ali Mahdavi, M., Allen, S.L., Brooks, N.H., Bas-
tasz, R., Baylor, L.R., et al., Divertor plasma
physics experiments in the DIII-D tokamak, in
Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mon-treal, 1996), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1997) 397.[257] Kaufmann, M., Schweinzer, J., Albrecht, M.,
Alexander, M., Asmussen, K., et al., Overview of
ASDEX-Upgrade results, in Fusion Energy 1996(Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1,
IAEA, Vienna (1997) 79.
[258] Lang, P.T., B¨ uchl, K., Kaufmann, M., Lang, R.S.,
Mertens, V., M¨ uller, H.W., Neuhauser, J., High-
eciency plasma refueling by pellet injection from
the magnetic high-eld side into ASDEX-Upgrade,P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 79(1997) 1487.
[259] Raman, R., Martin, F., Quirion, B., St. Onge, M.,
Lachambre, J.-L., et al., Experimental demonstra-
tion of nondisruptive, central fueling of a tokamak
by compact toroid injection, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73
(1994) 3101.
[260] Franzen, P., Mertens, V., Neu, G., Zehetbauer,
T., ASDEX-Upgrade Team: Online connementregime identication for the discharge control sys-
tem at ASDEX-Upgrade, in Controlled Fusion and
Plasma Physics 1996 (Proc. 23rd Eur. Conf. Kiev,1996) (1996).
[261] Zehetbauer, T., Franzen, P., Neu, G., Mertens, V.,
Raupp, G., Treutterer, W., Zasche, D., ASDEX-Upgrade Team, Plasma regime guided discharge
control at ASDEX-Upgrade, in Fusion Technology
1996 (Proc. 19th Symp. Lisbon, 1996), (1996).
[262] Kadomstev, B., Plasma Phys. (Rus.) 1(1975) 710.
[263] Kadomstev, B., Pogutse, O., JETPh 65(1973)
575.
[264] Mirnov, S., Semenov, I., Observation of disruptive-
instability ne structure in a tokamak, in Plasma
Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research1996 (Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Berchtesgaden, 1976),
Nucl. Fusion (suppl.) 1(1977) 291.
[265] Karger, F., Lackner, K., Fussman, G., Cannici, B.,
et al., On the origin of the disruptive instability
in the Pulsator I tokamak, in Plasma Physics and
Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research 1976 (Proc.
6th Int. Conf. Berchtesgaden, 1976), Nucl. Fusion
(suppl.) 1(1977) 267.
[266] Mirnov, S.V., Semenov, I., in Controlled Fusion
and Plasma Physics 1977 (Proc. 8th Eur. Conf.
Prague, 1977), Vol. 1, European Physical Society,Geneva (1977) 45.
[267] Fredrickson, E., Chang, Z., Budny, R., Darrow, D.,
Mazzucato, E., Nazikan, R., Janos, A., Mcguire,K.M., Majeski, R., Phillips, C., Schilling, G.,
Taylor, G., Wilson, R., Zweben, S., Mirnov, S.,
Semenov, I., Advances in understanding of disrup-tions and MHD in TFTR, in Controlled Fusion
and Plasma Physics 1995 (Proc. 22nd Eur. Conf.
Bournemouth, 1995), Vol. 19C, Part III, EuropeanPhysical Society, Geneva (1995) 45{48.
[268] Taylor, P.L., Kellman, A.G., Rice, B.W.,
Humphreys, D.A., Experimental measure-ments of the current, temperature and density
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2385

--- Page 137 ---

ITER Physics Basis
prole changes during a disruption in the DIII-D
tokamak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76(1996) 916.
[269] Wolf, R., JET Internal Report, Rep. (93)08, 73
(1993).
[270] Savrukhin, P.V., Lyadina, E.S., Martynov, D.A.,
Kislov, D.A., Poznyak, V.I., Coupling of internalm=1a n dm= 2 modes at density limit disrup-
tions in the T-10 tokamak, Nucl. Fusion 34(1994)
317.
[271] Sch¨ uller, F.C., Disruptions in tokamaks, in Con-
trolled Fusion and Plasma Physics 1995 (Proc.
22nd Eur. Conf. Bournemouth, 1995), Plasma
Phys. Control. Fusion 37(1995) A135{A162.
[272] Yoshino, R., et al., JAERI, Naka-gun, Ibaraki-ken,
Japan, Disruption energy deposition in JT-60U,
presentation to the 4th Disruption, Plasma Con-
trol and MHD Expert Group Meeting, Naka, per-sonal communication, 1996.
[273] Mueller, D., Bell, M.G., Frederickson, E., Janos,
A.C., Jobes, F.C., Johnson, L.C., Lawson, E.J.,Marsala, R., Owens, D.K., Park, H., Ramsey, A.T.,
Senko, T., Takahashi, H., Taylor, G., Wong, K.-L.,
Disruption avoidance on TFTR, Fusion Technol.30(1996) 251.
[274] Putvinski, S., Aymar, R., Boucher, D., Cheng,
C.Z., Conner, J.W., Cordey, J.G., Costley, A.E.,Engelmann, F., Fujisawa, N., Fujiwara, M.,
Jacquinot, J., Khayrutdinov, R., Kishimoto, H.,
Konovalov, S.V., Kukushkin, A., Kuteev, B.,Lukash, V., Mirnov, S., Moreau, D., Mukhova-
tov, V., Nevins, W.M., Perkins, F.W., Polevoi,
A.R., Post, D., Putvinskaya, N., Rosenbluth, M.N.,Sauter, O., Sautho, N., Shimada, M., Shimo-
mura, Y., Sokolov, Yu.A., Stambaugh, R.D., Tak-
izuka, T., Uckan, N., Wakatani, M., Wesley, J.,Willis, J., Yoshino, R., Young, K., ITER physics,
in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mon-
treal, 1996), Vol. 2, IAEA, Vienna (1997) 737{753.
[275] Wesley, J., Fujisawa, N., Ortolani, S., Putvin-
ski, S., Rosenbluth, M.N., Disruption, vertical dis-placement event and halo current characteriza-
tion for ITER, in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th
Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 2, IAEA, Vienna(1997) 971{978.
[276] Callen, J.D., Waddell, B.V., Carreras, B., Azumi,
M., Catto, P.J., Hicks, H.R., Holmes, J.A., Lee,D.K., Lynch, S.J., Smith, J., Soler, M., Tsang,
K.T., Whitson, J.C., Magnetic ‘islandography’
in tokamaks, in Plasma Physics and ControlledNuclear Fusion Research 1978, (Proc. 7th Int.
Conf. Innsbruck, 1978), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna
(1978) 415{431.
[277] Yoshino, R., Neyatani, Y., Isei, N., Matsukawa,
M., Hosogene, N., Operational scenarios to avoid
disruptions in JT-60U, J. Plasma Fusion Res. 70
(1994) 1081.[278] Wesley, J., Fujisawa, N., Putvinski, S., Rosenbluth,
M.N., Assessment of disruption and disruption-
related physics basis for ITER, in Fusion Engi-neering 1997 (Proc. 17th Symp. San Diego, 1997),
Vol. 1, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ (1998) 483{490.
[279] Granetz, R.S., Hutchinson, I.H., Sorci, J., Irby,
J.H., Labombard, B., Gwinn, D., Disruptions and
halo currents in Alcator C-Mod, Nucl. Fusion 36
(1996) 545.
[280] Sayer, R.O., Peng, Y.-K.M., Jardin, S.C., Kellman,
A.G., Wesley, J.C., TSC plasma halo simulation of
a DIII-D vertical displacement event, Nucl. Fusion
33(1993) 969.
[281] Yoshino, R., Nakamura, Y., Netatani, Y., Avoid-
ance of VDEs during plasma current quench in JT-
60U, Nucl. Fusion 36(1996) 295.
[282] Noll, P., Aigle, R., Browne, M.L., Corbyn, D.,
Eriksson, T., Froger, C., Huguet, M., Niedermeyer,
H., Rebut, P.H., Santagiustina, A., Sonnerup, L.,
Watkins, J.R., Wesson, J., Stabilization of verti-cal position and control of plasma shape in JET,
in Fusion Engineering 1985 (Proc. 11th Symp.
Austin, 1985), Vol. 1, IEEE, New York (1986) 33{40.
[283] Strait, E.J., Lao, L.L., Luxon, J.L., Reis, E.E.,
Observation of poloidal current ﬂow to the vac-uum vessel wall during vertical instabilities in the
DIII-D tokamak, Nucl. Fusion 31(1991) 527.
[284] Kugel, W.H., Asakura, N., Bell, R., in Controlled
Fusion and Plasma Physics 1989 (Proc. 16th Eur.
Conf. Venice, 1989), Vol. 13B, Part I, European
Physical Society, Geneva (1989) 199.
[285] Gruber, O., Pautasso, G., Seidel, U., B¨ uchl, K.,
Lackner, K., Mertens, V., Mast, F., Schittenhelm,
M., Suttrop, W., Ulrich, M., ASDEX-UpgradeTeam, Disruptions in vertically elongated ASDEX-
Upgrade plasmas, in Plasma Physics and Con-
trolled Nuclear Fusion Research 1994 (Proc. 15th
Int. Conf. Seville, 1994), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna
(1995) 675{684.
[286] JET Team (presented by A. Tanga), Disruptions
and vertical displacement events in JET, in Fusion
Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal,1996), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1997) 723{730.
[287] Riccardo, V., Andrew, P., Kaye, A., Noll, P.,
Raimondi, T., Asymmetric vertical displacementevents at JET, in Fusion Engineering 1997 (Proc.
17th Symp. San Diego, 1997), Vol. 1, IEEE, Pis-
cataway, NJ (1998) 112{115.
[288] Andrew, P., Noll, P., Riccardo, V., The rela-
tion between halo currents and plasma displace-
ment/deformation in JET, in Fusion Engineering1997 (Proc. 17th Symp. San Diego, 1997), Vol. 1,
IEEE, Piscataway, NJ (1998) 108{115.
[289] Sakasai, A., JT-60 Team, High performance and
steady-state experiments on JT-60U, in Fusion
2386 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 138 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Engineering 1997 (Proc. 17th Symp. San Diego,
1997), Vol. 1, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ (1998) 18{25.
[290] Pomphrey, N., Bialek, J., Park, W., Modeling the
toroidal asymmetry of poloidal halo currents in
conducting structures, Nucl. Fusion 38(1998) 449.
[291] Janos, A.C., Frederickson, E.D., Mcguire, K.M.,
Batha, S.H., Bell, M.G., Bitter, M., Bundy, R.,
Bush, C.E., Efthimion, P.C., Hawryluk, R.J., Hill,
K.W., Hosea, J.C., Jobes, F.C., Johnson, D.W.,Levinton, F., Manseld, D.K., Meade, D.M., Med-
ley, S.S., Monticello, D.A., Mueller, D., Nagayama,
Y., Owens, D.K., Park, H.K., Park, W., Post,
D.E., Schivell, J., Strachan, J.D., Taylor, G.,
Ulrickson, M., Von Goeller, S., Wilfrid, E., Wong,K.L., Yamada, M., Young, K.M., Zarnstor, M.C.,
Zweben, S.J., TFTR Group, Disruptions in the
TFTR tokamak, in Plasma Physics and Con-trolled Fusion Research 1992 (Proc. 14th Int. Conf.
W¨urzburg, 1992), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna (1993)
527{539.
[292] Martin, G., Chatelier, M., Doloc, C., New insight
into runaway electrons production and conne-
ment, in Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics1995 (Proc. 22nd Eur. Conf. Bournemouth, 1995),
Vol. 19C, Part II, European Physical Society,
Geneva (1995) 41{44.
[293] Gill, R.D., Generation and loss of runaway elec-
trons following disruptions in JET, Nucl. Fusion
33(1993) 1613.
[294] Yoshino, R., Kondoh, T., Neyatani, Y., Itami,
K., Kawano, Y., Isei, N., Fast plasma shutdown
by killer pellet injection in JT-60U with reducedheat ﬂux on the divertor plate and avoiding run-
away generation, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 39
(1997) 313.
[295] Sokolov, Yu.A., Multiplication of accelerated elec-
trons in a tokamak, JETP Lett. 29(1979). (Trans-
lation: Pis‘ma v Zhurnal Eksperimental’noi i Teo-
reticheskoi Fiziki 29(1979) 244.)
[296] Jayakumar, R., Fleishmann, H.H., Zweben, S.,
Collisional avalanche exponentiation of runaway
electrons in electried plasmas, Phys. Lett. A 172
(1993) 447.
[297] Putvinski, S., Fujisawa, N., Post, D., Putvinskaya,
N., Rosenbluth, M.N., Wesley, J., Fast plasma ter-
mination by impurity fueling, J. Nucl. Mater. 241{
243(1997) 316.
[298] Rosenbluth, M.N., Putvinski, S.V., Theory for
avalanche of runaway electrons in tokamaks, Nucl.Fusion 37(1997) 1355.
[299] Fussman, G., On the motion of runaway electrons
in momentum space, Nucl. Fusion 19(1979) 327.
[300] Connor, J.W., Hastie, R.J., Relativistic limitations
on runaway electrons, Nucl. Fusion 15(1975) 415.
[301] Jaspers, R., Finken, K.H., Mank, G., Hoenen, F.,
Boedo, J.A., Lopes Cardozo, N.J., Sch¨ uller, F.C.,Experimental investigation of runaway electron
generation in TEXTOR, Nucl. Fusion 33(1993)
1775.
[302] Jaspers, R., Lopes Cardozo, N.J., Sch¨ uller, F.C.,
Finken, K.H., Grewe, T., Mank, G., Disruption
generated runaway electrons in TEXTOR andITER, Nucl. Fusion 36(1996) 367.
[303] Pankratov, I.M., Jaspers, R., Finken, K.H.,
Entrop, I., Mank, G., Control of runaway elec-tron secondary generation by changing Z
e,N u c l .
Fusion 38(1998) 279.
[304] Kawano, Y., Yoshino, R., Neyatani, Y., Kondoh,
T., Isei, N., Ishida, S., Tobita, K., Hatae, T.,
Itami, K., Sakasai, A., JT-60U Team, Fast cur-rent shutdown scenario for major disruption soft-
ening in JT-60U, in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc.
16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1, IAEA,Vienna (1997) 345{357.
[305] Kawano, Y., Yoshino, R., Neyatani, Y., Kon-
doh, T., Isei, N., Ishida, S., Tobita, K., Hatae,T., Itami, K., Sakasai, A., JT-60U Team, Sup-
pression of runaway electrons during disruptive
discharge terminations in JT-60U, in ControlledFusion and Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur.
Conf. Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part II,
European Physical Society, Geneva (1997) 501{504.
[306] Luckhardt, S., University of California San Diego,
San Diego, Runaway bursts and plasma mixingduring DIII-D killer pellet experiments, personal
communication, 1997.
[307] Tokuda, S., Eect of magnetic perturbations on
runaway electrons generation, paper presented at
the ITER Disruption, Plasma Control, and MHD
Expert Group Meeting, personal communication,September 1997.
[308] Mynick, H.E., Strachen, J.D., Transport of runawy
and thermal electrons due to magnetic microtur-
bulence, Phys. Fluids 24(1981) 695.
[309] Laurent, L., Rax, J.M., Stochastic instability of
runaway electrons in tokamaks, Europhys. Lett. 11
(1990) 219.
[310] Russo, A.J., Eect of ripple on runaway electrons
in tokamaks, Nucl. Fusion 31(1991) 117.
[311] Rosenbluth, M.N., Parks, P.B., Post, D., Putvin-
ski, S., Putvinskaya, N., Scott, H.A., Runawayelectrons and fast plasma shutdown, in Fusion
Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal,
1996), Vol. 2, IAEA, Vienna (1997) 979{986.
[312] Schittenhelm, M., Runaway generation during
disruptions in ITER taking account of parti-
cle trapping, in Controlled Fusion and PlasmaPhysics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur. Conf. Berchtesgar-
den, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part III, European Physical
Society, Geneva (1997) 985{988.
[313] Rosenbluth, M.N., Neoclassical peaking eects in
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)
2387

--- Page 139 ---

ITER Physics Basis
avalanche runaway generation’, personal commu-
nication, 1997.
[314] Yoshino, R., Runaways termination, paper pre-
sented at the ITER Disruption, Plasma Control,
and MHD Expert Group Meeting, personal com-
munication, September 1997.
[315] Martin, G., Localization of photo-neutron acti-
vated regions on the Tore-Supra inboard limiter,
personal communication, 1997.
[316] Yoshino, R., Intense helium gas pung in JT-60U,
paper presented at the ITER Disruption, Plasma
Contrrol, and MHD Expert Group Meeting, per-
sonal communication, March 1997.
[317] Taylor, P.L., Massive He gas pu results, in
Runaway Electron Studies in DIII-D Disruptions,
paper presented at the ITER Disruption, Plasma
Control, and MHD Expert Group Meeting, per-sonal communication, May 1998.
[318] Schmidt, G.L., MHD activity in TFTR pellet injec-
tion experiments, personal communication, 1997.
[319] Kuteev, B.V., Sergeev, V. Yu., Sudo, S., Emer-
gency discharge quench or rampdown by a noble
gas pellet, Nucl. Fusion 35(1995) 1167.
[320] Pautasso, G., B¨ uchl, K., Fuchs, J.C., Gruber, O.,
Herrmann, A., Lackner, K., Lang, P.T., Mast,
K.F., Ulrich, M., Zohm, H., Use of impurity pel-lets to control energy dissipation during disrup-
tion, Nucl. Fusion 36(1996) 1291.
[321] Kellman, A.G., Cutherbertson, J.W., Evans, T.E.,
Humphreys, D.A., Hyatt, A.W., Jahns, G.L.,
Jernigan, T., Lasnier, C.J., Lee, R.L., Leuer, J.A.,
Luckhardt, S., Schaer, M.J., Taylor, P.L., Whyte,D.G., Wroblewski, D., Zhang, J., Disruption stud-
ies in DIII-D, in Fusion Energy 1996 (Proc. 16th
Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1, IAEA, Vienna(1997) 739{746.
[322] Granetz, R.S., Hutchinson, I.H., Sorci, J., Garnier,
D . T . ,I r b y ,J . H . ,L a b o m b a r d ,B . ,M a r m a r ,E . S . ,
ALCATOR Group, Disruptions, halo currents and
killer pellets in Alcator C-Mod, in Fusion Energy1996 (Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Montreal, 1996), Vol. 1,
IAEA, Vienna (1997) 757{762.
[323] Schmidt, G.L., Ali-Arshad, S., Bartlett, D.,
Chankin, A., Clement, S., Gadeberg, M., Kup-
schus, P., O’Brien, D., Reichle, R., Sadler, G.,
Tanga, A., Potential safe termination by injec-tion of polypropylene pellets in JET, in Controlled
Fusion and Plasma Physics 1995 (Proc. 22nd Eur.
Conf. Bournemouth, 1995), Vol. 19C, Part IV,European Physical Society, Geneva (1995) 21{24.
[324] Schmidt, G.L., Frederickson, E., Impurity injection
on TFTR, in U.S. Disruption Physics R&D Reportfor FY, personal communication, 1997 (U.S. ITER
Home Team Rep. ITER/US/97/PH-14, August
1997).
[325] Parks, P.B., Trunbull, R.J., Eect of transonicﬂow in the ablation cloud on the lifetime of a
solid hydrogen pellet in a plasma, Phys. Fluids 21
(1978) 1735.
[326] Milora, S.L., Houlberg, W.A., Lengyel, L.L.,
Mertens, V., Pellet fueling, Nucl. Fusion 35(1995)
657.
[327] Jardin, S.C., TSC analysis of TFTR impurity
injection experiments, in U.S. Disruption Physics
R&D Report for FY, 1997 (U.S. ITER Home TeamRep. ITER/US/97/PH-14, August 1997).
[328] Whyte, D.G., Evans, T.E., Kellman, A.G.,
Humphreys, D.A., Hyatt, A.W., Jernigan, T.C.,
Lee, R.L., Luckhardt, S.L., Parks, P.B., Schaf-
fer, M.J., Taylor, P.L., Energy balance, radiationand stability during rapid plasma termination via
impurity pellet injections on DIII-D, in Controlled
Fusion and Plasma Physics 1997 (Proc. 24th Eur.Conf. Berchtesgarden, 1997), Vol. 21A, Part III,
European Physical Society, Geneva (1997) 1137{
1140.
[329] Yoshino, R., Nakamura, Y., Neyatani, Y., Plasma
equilibrium control during the slow plasma current
quench with avoidance of plasma{wall interactionin JT-60U, Nucl. Fusion 37(1997) 1161.
[330] Yoshino, R., Koga, J., Takeda, T., Sensor algo-
rithms of the plasma vertical position to avoid avertical displacement event during plasma-current
quench on JT-60U, Fusion Technol. 30(1996) 237.
[331] Neyatani, Y., Yoshino, R., JAERI, Naka-gun,
Ibaraki-ken, Japan, Halo current measurement in
JT-60U, paper presented at the ITER Disruption,
Plasma Control and MHD Expert Group Meeting,personal communication, September 1997.
[332] Nakamura, Y., Yoshino, R., Neyatani, Y., Mecha-
nism of vertical displacement events in disruptivedischarges, Nucl. Fusion 36(1996) 643.
[333] Yoshino, R., Ohsawa, M., Fluctuations in plasma
equilibrium control on JT-60U, Fusion Technol. 30
(1996) 159.
[334] Nakamura, Y., Yoshino, R., Pomphrey, N., Jardin,
S.C.,
p-collapse-induced vertical displacement
event in high ptokamak disruption, Plasma Phys.
Control. Fusion 38(1996) 1791.
[335] Janos, A.C., Frederickson, E.D., Bundy, R.V., Dar-
row, D.S., Mcguire, K.M., Zweben, S.J., Char-
acterization of alpha particle loss during disrup-tions in TFTR during deuterium{tritium opera-
tion, Nucl. Fusion 36(1996) 475.
[336] Rosenbluth, M.N., Putvinski, S.V., Parks, P.B.,
Liquid jets for fast plasma termination in toka-
maks, Nucl. Fusion 37(1997) 955.
[337] Granetz, R.S., Massive D pellet injec-
tion in Alcator C-Mod, paper presented
at the ITER Disruption, Plasma Con-
trol, and MHD Expert Group Meeting,personal communication, September 1997.
2388 Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999)

--- Page 140 ---

Chapter 3: MHD stability, operational limits and disruptions
Granetz, R.S., Greenwald, M., Mossessian, D.,
Massive D 2killer pellet injection experiments on
Alcator C-Mod, in U.S. Disruption Physics R&DReport for FY, 1997 (U.S. ITER Home Team
Rep. ITER/US/97/PH-14, August 1997).
[338] Scott, H., Radiation transport calculations for
killer pellets for ITER, in U.S. Disruption Physics
R&D Report for FY, 1997 (U.S. ITER Home Team
Rep. ITER/US/97/PH-14, August 1997).
[339] Frederickson, E.D., Mcguire, K., Change, Z.,
Janos, A., Bell, M., Budny, R.V., Bush, C.E., Man-
ickan, J., Mynick, H., Nazikan, R., Taylor, G., 
limit disruptions in the tokamak fusion test reac-
tor, Phys. Plasmas 2(1995) 4216.
[340] Mertens, V., Aubanel, C., Gruber, O., Kaufmann,
M., Neu, G., Raupp, G., Richter, H., Treut-
terer, W., Zasche, D., Zehetbauer, T.H., ASDEX-Upgrade Team, NBI Team, ICRH Team, Plasma
performance optimization in ASDEX-Upgrade,
Fusion Technol. 32(1997) 459.
[341] Wr oblewski, D., Jahns, G.L., Leuer, J.A., Tokamak
disruption alarm based on a neural network model
of the high- limit, Nucl. Fusion 37(1997) 725.
[342] Raupp, G., Gruber, O., Kallenbach, A., Mertens,
V., Neu, G., Stereibl, B., Treutterer, W.,
Zehetbauer, T.H., Zasche, D., ASDEX-UpgradeTeam, Discharge supervision control on ASDEX-
Upgrade, Fusion Technol. 32(1997) 444.
[343] Morris, A.W., Hender, T.C., Hugill, J., Haynes,
P.S., et al., Feedback stabilization of disruption
precursors in a tokamak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64
(1990) 1254.
[344] Kislov, D.A., Alikaev, V.V., Esipchuk, Yu.V.,
Kakurin, A.M., Kislov, A.Ya., Martynov, D.A.,
Notkin, G.E., Razumova, K.A., Sushkov, A.V.,Volkov, V.V., The m=2 ,n= 1 mode suppres-
sion by ECRH on the T-10 tokamak, Nucl. Fusion
37(1997) 339.
[345] Jardin, S.C., Pomphrey, N., Delucia, J., Dynami-
cal modeling and position control of tokamaks, J.Comput. Phys. 66(1986) 481.
[346] Khayrutdinov, R., Lukash, V., Studies of plasma
equilibrium and transport in a tokamak fusiondevice with the inverse-variable technique, J. Com-
put. Phys. 109(1993) 193.
[347] Barabaschi, P., ITER Joint Central Team, Garch-
ing, Germany, MAXFEA nite-element dynamic
equilbrium modelling code, personal communica-
tion, 1998.
[348] Merrill, B.J., Jardin, S.C., Ulrickson, M., Bell, M.,Dynamics and energy ﬂow in a disrupting tokamak
plasma, Fusion Eng. Des. 15(1991) 163.
[349] Sayer, R.O., TSC lamentary representation of
the ITER vacuum vessel, blanket and divertor, in
U.S. Disruption Physics R&D Report for FY, 1997
(U.S. ITER Home Team Rep. ITER/US/97/PH-14, August 1997).
[350] Weissenberger, D.W., SPARC version 1:1 user
manual, PPPL-2494, Princeton Plasma PhysicsLaboratory (1988).
[351] Khayrutdinov, R., Lukash, V., Plasma Phys. Rep.
22(1996) 91.
[352] Humphreys, D., Kellman, A.G., Scoping studies of
ITER disruption scenarios using the DINA code, inU.S. Disruption Physics R&D Report for FY, 1997
(U.S. ITER Home Team Rep. ITER/US/97/PH-
14, August 1997).
[353] Chiu, S.C., et al., Fokker{Plank simulations of
knock-on runaway electron generation in toka-
maks, paper presented at the 1997 InternationalSherwood Fusion Theory Conference, Madison,
WI, 1997.
[354] Jardin, S.C., Chang, Z., Frederickson, E., Schmidt,
G.L., Kellman, A., Humphreys, D., Evans, T.,
Whyte, D., Taylor, P., Merrill, B., Modeling of
impurity pellet injection experiments in TFTR andDIII [sic] and implications for fast safety shutdown
of ITER (paper 3R12), Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 41
(1996) 1435.
[355] Scott, H.A., Mayler, W., GLF { a simulation code
for X-ray lasers, Appl. Phys. B 58(1994) 35.
[356] Sykes, A., Wesson, J.A., in Plasma Physics and
Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research 1980 (Proc.
8th Int. Conf. Brussels, 1980), Vol. 1, IAEA,
Vienna (1981) 237.
[357] Hassanien, A., et al., Modeling plasma/material
interactions during a tokamak disruption, Argonne
National Laboratory, Rep. ANL/FPP/TM 271
(1994).
(Manuscript received 8 September 1998
Final manuscript accepted 16 June 1999)
E-mail address of J.C. Wesley:
wesley@fusion.gat.com
Subject classication: B0, Te; B0, Tt; B0, Ti; B0,
Td; B0, Tm; C0, Te; C0, Tt; C0, Ti; C0, Td; C0,Tm; F0, Te; F0, Tt; F0, Ti; F0, Td; F0, Tm; M0, Td
Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 39, No. 12 (1999) 2389